
Once a home of the Manhattan Project, the fields surrounded by forested valleys and rolling hills in Oak Ridge, Tenn., could soon yield another nuclear first.
Concrete foundations and pilings are rising here for what is expected to be one of the first of a new generation of nuclear power plants, known as small modular reactors. The company behind it, Kairos Power, has been developing its technology for almost a decade and is now deep in the throes of construction.
Many companies are racing to build reactors that experts say could, over time, be cheaper than the kind of large nuclear power plants that have been in use for decades. To hear corporate executives and government officials tell it, the world is at the dawn of a new nuclear age that will provide cheap energy and satiate artificial intelligence technology's staggering appetite for electricity.
At the center of this promise is the idea of shrinking the vessels where nuclear reactions heat water to produce steam used to spin turbines. The components of these smaller reactors, the thinking goes, can be mass-produced and assembled more easily than conventional designs built by a small army of highly skilled workers.
The nuclear power industry has long struggled to complete projects. Almost all U.S. nuclear power plants in operation started generating power decades ago, most before Bill Clinton became president. In recent decades, steep costs and long delays, coupled with concerns about safety, have stymied nuclear energy.
"I think a lot of people recognize the value of what nuclear can bring but are still a little bit nervous about whether it can actually be done," said Mike Laufer, co-founder and chief executive of Kairos Power, which is based in the San Francisco Bay Area. "Credibility can be very hard to earn, but it can be lost very quickly."
The United States has more nuclear power reactors than any country, but it badly trails in building new ones. In the last decade China has built more than three dozen reactors while the United States completed just two. Those two, at the Alvin W. Vogtle Electric Generating Plant near Augusta, Ga., came years late and cost $35 billion - about three times the original estimates.
President Trump wants new reactors to be a signature achievement of his term. His Energy Department has awarded $800 million for new reactor technologies and $1 billion in loan guarantees to restart the Three Mile Island power plant in Pennsylvania. The government is expected to offer billions more.
A cooling tower at the dormant Three Mile Island power plant in Pennsylvania. The Energy Department has awarded $1 billion in loan guarantees to restart the facility.Credit...George Etheredge for The New York Times
The Trump family's social media company is also getting into this business. In December, Trump Media & Technology Group said it planned to merge with a nuclear fusion company, TAE Technologies. Fusion energy is different from fission energy used by all nuclear power plants today, and probably many years from being perfected, energy experts say.
During a recent visit to the Idaho National Laboratory, Mr. Trump's energy secretary, Chris Wright, blamed regulatory hurdles for helping stifle the growth of nuclear energy. He said the creation of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission almost 50 years ago had led to excessive bureaucracy.
"Since that date, we have permitted, constructed and brought online two reactors," Mr. Wright said.
Some experts, however, contend the main problem is an industry that has repeatedly struggled to deliver. The hurdles facing advanced reactors are even bigger, the experts say, because they are novel and some require a new kind of uranium fuel that the industry has only limited experience with.
New reactors will also require significant financial investment and federal aid. That might not be a problem given the current bipartisan enthusiasm for nuclear energy, but that good will could evaporate if the industry again falters.
"Once again it's the bright shiny object," said Peter Bradford, a former commissioner on the N.R.C. and a longtime critic of the high costs and delays that characterize new types of reactors. To be successful, a new design should be able to compete with other types of energy, he added. "Nuclear has just never been able to do that."
The Race to Lower Costs
Nine years ago, the three founders of Kairos Power began developing their designs, pinning their hopes on a new approach. The three men all studied nuclear and mechanical engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, where J. Robert Oppenheimer, the leader of the Manhattan Project, once taught.
Kairos executives said they had opted to test each phase of the plant's development as it progressed, rather than take the approach more common in this line of work: Design, construct and hope for the best.
Unlike conventional nuclear plants, Kairos's reactor will not have large, domed buildings made of concrete and metal. And steam will not billow from huge water towers. Instead of water, the Kairos reactor will heat salt.
The reactor will rise a bit over about 32 feet. The full commercial design includes two reactor buildings and a turbine with an overall footprint of 60 acres.
The company, which has 540 full-time employees, designs and produces its own components. It makes many of the parts in Albuquerque, about 60 miles from Los Alamos, the ultimate headquarters of the Manhattan Project.
Nuclear projects have been hampered by high costs and the difficulty associated with building a first-of-its-kind project, Mr. Laufer said. "And the recent experiences have only reinforced that."
Production work underway at the Kairos Power facility in Albuquerque.Credit...Ramsay de Give for The New York Times
NuScale, a company that was once expected to deliver the first small reactor, in November 2023 had to cancel a project in Idaho after utilities pulled out of agreements to buy electricity from it because costs had risen too much.
The company said its technology was now advancing through a partnership with ENTRA1 Energy, an owner and developer of power plants. In September, the two companies and the Tennessee Valley Authority, a federal government owned power company, announced plans to develop nuclear reactors. The first NuScale units will be built in Oak Ridge and could deliver power by 2030, the company said.
Other companies are pursuing similar projects.
GE Vernova Hitachi Nuclear Energy has plans to build several smaller reactors starting in Ontario. TerraPower, a company backed by Bill Gates, is building a reactor in Wyoming.
Radiant, a start-up, says it is set to build this year a portable, micro reactor that will produce enough electricity to power 1,000 homes. Such devices are for special uses like providing energy to data centers or the military.
"If you don't need a grid connection, we're a great solution," said Ray Wert, a company spokesman.
Like Kairos, Radiant plans to manufacture its reactors in Oak Ridge, home to the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, one of the Energy Department's 17 national laboratories.
At its site in Oak Ridge, Kairos is working on a test reactor expected to be complete in 2028; a demonstration unit, capable of producing electricity, is aimed for 2030. The company has a contract to supply 500 megawatts of energy capacity - about half the capacity of the typical large-scale nuclear plant - to Google by 2035.
Google's involvement could make a huge difference. Technology companies investing in A.I. bring the kinds of money and interest that were missing in the early 2000s when delays and soaring costs last scuppered ambitions for a nuclear renaissance.
Kairos declined to say how much its plant would cost. But the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, a nonprofit research organization, estimated in 2023 that NuScale's canceled Idaho project, which would have been roughly the same size as the one Kairos is building, would cost about $9.3 billion.
David Schlissel, president of Schlissel Technical Consulting based in Belmont, Mass., and the author of the institute's analysis, said the cost to build small modular reactors had probably increased since 2023 because everything costs more now, including concrete and construction worker pay. "It's a different cost environment," he said.
NuScale said that the institute's 2023 estimates were too high, and that its current costs were competitive with other power projects.
Estimating costs is hard because much about the small reactors is new, including their fuel.
 "Credibility can be very hard to earn, but it can be lost very quickly," said Mike Laufer, a founder and the chief executive of Kairos Power.Credit...Ramsay de Give for The New York Times
Reactors being built by Kairos and others will run on something called TRi-structural ISOtropic particle fuel, or TRISO, that was developed by the Department of Energy. The TRISO particles are enriched uranium kernels coated with multiple layers of carbon and ceramic.
Thousands of the poppy-seed-size particles are embedded in a graphite matrix to form pebbles the size of golf balls. The TRISO shell confines radioactive material from the uranium as it breaks down and produces heat. With the fuel's built-in containment system and the molten salt coolant, the reactors won't need the same costly reinforced containment buildings used in conventional plants, proponents say.
But some scientists are not confident that this new fuel allays all safety concerns. Edwin Lyman, a physicist and the director of nuclear power safety at the Union of Concerned Scientists, said the TRISO particles can generate very high heat, which warrants the use of containment buildings.
"In my view, the claims that are being made about TRISO are way oversold," Mr. Lyman said. "We're really headed toward a very dangerous experiment on the American people."
But other experts are less worried about the new fuel and reactor designs.
Charles Oppenheimer, the grandson of J. Robert Oppenheimer, is the founder and chief executive of Oppenheimer Energy, a developer of nuclear energy projects. He said he was discussing a role as an adviser on plans to revive V.C. Summer, a more traditional, large-scale nuclear power project in South Carolina that was canceled in 2017 after $9 billion had been spent on it.
Mr. Oppenheimer said he was also hopeful about the Kairos project, in which he is not involved. "They've been executing very well," he said. "The other ones that are making more noise aren't building as much. In this game it never counts until you've got it running."

The monthslong closure of the Strait of Hormuz is reinforcing an expensive geopolitical lesson about how risky it can be to rely on imported energy.
From South America to Southeast Asia, governments and private companies are being forced to look inward and take steps to harness what they can domestically, even when doing so raises upfront costs. Call it the era of me-first energy.
Guyana, a fast-growing South American oil producer that ran short of fuel this spring, is discussing building its first refinery. Indonesia is accelerating plans to harness more power from the sun. Many other Asian countries have turned to coal in order to plug their energy gaps, at least for now. And in Europe, Belgium is trying to nationalize nuclear energy.
Individuals are also taking matters into their own hands, buying electric vehicles to avoid rising fuel costs or installing rooftop solar panels to lower electricity bills. In the Philippines, which was especially hard hit after U.S.-Israeli strikes on Iran started, imports of electric cars and solar equipment from China recently hit records, according to Ember, a London research group.
But countries and businesses can do only so much on their own. The world has developed a tightly interwoven energy system primarily because it is cheaper for countries to specialize in the commodities they have and the technologies where they have expertise - and to import what they lack.
Even the United States, the world's biggest oil and natural gas producer, is not truly energy independent. It buys crude oil from Canada, Mexico and Venezuela while selling its own fuel to the rest of the world.
Still, each gallon of gasoline or kilowatt-hour of electricity available locally offers that much more of a buffer in the next war or shipping disruption.
"Countries will have a much more robust mix of things that they generate domestically and then a much more cautious eye to how they create trade relationships," said Sarah Ladislaw, the founding director of the New Energy Industrial Strategy Center and a former adviser to President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
How drastic these reforms are will depend partly on how long the war lasts. The sooner it ends, the more likely it is that people will forget the pain of higher prices and shortages.
The oil shocks of the 1970s lifted fuel prices for more than a decade, remaking energy systems around the world. Countries invested in nuclear power, energy efficiency and more international cooperation, including collective efforts to stockpile oil.
Later oil prices rose for about six months around the Persian Gulf war of 1991 but did not reshape the global energy map, said Claudio Galimberti, chief economist for the research firm Rystad Energy.
A few things suggest that the war with Iran could leave a bigger mark. For one, it has wiped out more supply than any prior crisis. There are also many more alternatives to oil and gas available today than in the past. And because this upheaval comes on the heels of Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, the lessons are more likely to stick, said David Goldwyn, a former U.S. diplomat and Energy Department official.
"That much crisis in that short a time forces countries to rethink their energy security strategies for economic and national security reasons," Mr. Goldwyn said.
In the Philippines, which in 2024 relied on Persian Gulf countries for about a quarter of its imported oil and natural gas, the closure of Hormuz appeared to be accelerating the transition toward renewable energy.
The value of solar equipment that China exported to the Philippines hit a record of almost $300 million in March - more than double the previous monthly record - before a Chinese tax rebate expired on April 1, Ember data show.
Chinese solar exports to the Philippines fell in April but remained higher than usual, and the value of Chinese electric vehicles sold to the Philippines hit a new high.
That growth seems to have been driven as much by individual decisions as by government policy, which has helped make it attractive for Filipinos to embrace newer technology. Importantly, the Philippines does not subsidize electricity prices, which for residential customers were the highest in Southeast Asia as of March, according to Ember.
Mike de Guzman, president of Solaric, a rooftop-solar installer based near Manila, said his company was installing roughly twice as many systems each month as it had been before the war - and not coming close to keeping up with demand. "Solar is no longer seen as a cool gadget or a toy, but as a way to survive this new age," he said.
Mr. de Guzman gets most of his solar and battery equipment from China. But unlike oil and natural gas, of which you need a consistent supply, solar panels tend to last for decades, mitigating the risk of dependency.
The war has also made solar power a bigger national priority in neighboring Indonesia. "God willing, we will eliminate our dependence on imported fuel and save valuable foreign exchange reserves," the country's president, Prabowo Subianto, said in May.
Indonesia would be following in the footsteps of China, which limited its dependence on imported fuels by becoming a coal and clean energy powerhouse, while also stockpiling huge amounts of oil - a strategy that has served it well in this crisis.
Elsewhere, many behavioral and policy changes are extensions of the last energy shock, when Europe realized that its reliance on natural gas from Russia had made it incredibly vulnerable to the whims of the country's president, Vladimir V. Putin.
After Russia abruptly cut off gas supplies, forcing Europeans to pay much higher prices, many governments further embraced renewable energy. Europe's gas consumption is about 16 percent lower than before Russia began its war, according to International Energy Agency estimates.
Now, countries are doing more to preserve domestic energy resources. Belgium, which was among the biggest European buyers of natural gas from the Persian Gulf, is negotiating to buy the country's last two operating nuclear power plants, as well as several others that have shut down.
"Recent geopolitical events confirm an underlying trend: Europe must continue to reduce the risks of excessive energy dependence on any single region or supplier, whoever they may be," Mathieu Bihet, Belgium's minister of energy, said in an emailed response to questions.
Nuclear power is also seeing a resurgence in Asia, including Taiwan, where the governing party effectively withdrew its opposition to the technology.
A big distinction between this energy shock and the last one is that the war with Iran has mostly affected the flow of oil and fuels needed to drive and fly, whereas the 2022 crisis was largely about natural gas and electricity.
Soaring electric car sales in much of the world have been among the clearest signs that the war may hasten a shift away from oil. China, the world's leading manufacturer of such models, exported a record $9.1 billion worth of electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles in April, up more than 50 percent year over year, according to Ember. Exports to countries hit hard by the loss of Persian Gulf oil supplies, including Japan, Pakistan and India, were especially strong.
In Europe, sales of battery-powered cars climbed 38 percent in April from a year earlier, according to the European Automobile Manufacturers' Association.
In the meantime, policymakers in countries like the Philippines and Pakistan are looking to build or expand their fuel stockpiles to better insulate themselves from the next crisis. Such efforts will be expensive, meaning wealthier countries will fare better than poorer ones.
Oil producers are also looking to make changes. Kuwait, which has hardly been able to export any oil because of the closure of the Strait of Hormuz, wants to build more storage capacity abroad, outside the shipping choke point. And many countries across the Middle East are exploring building or expanding pipelines that would avoid the strait.
Guyana is confronting a different kind of predicament. It is extracting more than 900,000 barrels of oil a day - enough to meet almost 1 percent of global demand - but can't turn that oil into gasoline, diesel and other products. The country briefly faced fuel shortages this spring.
It is time, Guyana's president, Mohamed Irfaan Ali, said in March, to revive discussions about building the country's first oil refinery.
"We have to, in this hemisphere, optimize our resources, optimize the development of our resources for the protection of the hemisphere," he said.

Shocks to natural gas supplies are spurring countries in Asia and elsewhere to rethink their rejection of nuclear energy after the 2011 disaster in Fukushima, Japan.
The Fukushima plant, seen from above, set against the sea with several tall towers and an expanse of low-slung buildings and round container buildings.
By River Akira Davis and Meaghan Tobin
April 6, 2026 
In 2011, a meltdown at a nuclear plant in Japan caused governments around the world, from Taiwan to Italy, to move decisively and swiftly away from atomic energy. Fifteen years later, a different kind of energy crisis is hastening a move back.
The war in the Middle East is expected to cut the world off from millions of tons of liquefied natural gas, a fuel used extensively for power generation across Asia. Even in Europe and other regions with sustained access to gas, the diminishing supply of energy is causing prices to surge.
In response, nuclear power, seen by countries as an alternative energy source that is less vulnerable to outside shocks, is finding new backing even in some of the most historically antinuclear places.
In Taiwan, where the ruling party has opposed nuclear energy for decades, President Lai Ching-te said last month that the island should be open to nuclear power as a way to meet its growing energy demands. The move was an abrupt departure from Taiwan's previous energy strategy. After the 2011 disaster - when an earthquake and tsunami triggered a triple meltdown in Japan's Fukushima prefecture - Taipei committed to a "nuclear-free homeland" policy. The island shut down its final reactor last May.

In the past month, Taiwan's energy supply has been strained by the war in the Middle East. The phaseout of nuclear power has left the island precariously dependent on imports for nearly all its energy needs, just as its vital semiconductor industry requires more power. Taiwan procures about a third of its L.N.G. from Qatar, prompting officials to scramble for additional shipments from the United States.
Days after Mr. Lai's remarks, Taiwan's state utility company, Taipower, submitted a plan to restart one of the island's nuclear plants.
The president's decision "surprised many people, including members of his own party," said Titus Chen, the deputy director of a research institute at National Chengchi University in Taipei. Given decades of concern over building nuclear plants and storing fuel and waste on an island prone to earthquakes, he said, the ruling party's opposition to nuclear power "had become almost untouchable."
Similar shifts are visible across Asia, which buys about 90 percent of the liquefied natural gas that the Middle East produces.
In Japan, which mothballed its entire nuclear fleet after the 2011 disaster, regulators decided last week to alter antiterrorism requirements to effectively prevent the shutdown of some operational reactors and facilitate further restarts. In South Korea, the government said last month that it would accelerate work on five of the 10 nuclear power plants under maintenance so they could be restarted earlier.
Even if the turbulence in the Middle East settles, the supply shock, and the fact that L.N.G. deliveries are likely to remain disrupted for years, is giving countries "another reason to push for nuclear," said Tatsuya Terazawa, chief executive of the Institute of Energy Economics, Japan, a think tank.
The responses of Japan and Taiwan, whose energy policies were reshaped by the Fukushima disaster, are significant, Mr. Terazawa said, because they are likely to influence other nations' nuclear stances. "It has global context," he added.
In some parts of the world, the energy crisis is accelerating a nuclear pivot already underway, fueled by the power demands of artificial intelligence and data centers.
In the United States, the government has backed the nuclear industry's resurgence through billions of dollars in federal loan guarantees and tax credits. Before the war, experts estimated nuclear energy in the United States would need to triple by 2050 to meet rising energy demands. China has been building nuclear capacity even faster.
"The Middle East conflict will have long-term implications for nuclear power," said David Brown, the director of energy transition research at Wood Mackenzie, a consultancy. Prolonged supply disruptions and elevated power prices "could unlock a new level of political support." Yet, he said, nuclear power will come at a premium: "The ability to fund new nuclear capacity and scale new supply chain policies are the policy responses to watch in the months ahead."
For some, the acceleration of nuclear is not welcome news. On March 11, the 15th anniversary of the Fukushima disaster, the Citizens' Nuclear Information Center, a watchdog in Japan, issued a statement lamenting what it said was a national energy policy prioritizing nuclear expansion over public safety.

The previous day, 6,000 miles west of Tokyo, dozens of countries convened in Paris to work toward tripling global nuclear energy capacity by 2050, a goal that had been set in 2023. A total of 38 countries have signed, including four that endorsed the goal for the first time last month: Belgium, Brazil, China and Italy.
Italy, in particular, stood out.
In 2011, just months after the Fukushima disaster, Italy held a national referendum in which more than 90 percent of voters rejected a government plan to restart the country's nuclear program. The vote effectively paralyzed Italy's nuclear ambitions for more than a decade, cementing its dependence on imported electricity and natural gas.
Now, Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni's government has proposed a law to develop new nuclear technologies with the aim of having nuclear cover 11 to 22 percent of electricity demand by 2050. That plan is working its way through Parliament.
In Switzerland, which also put in place a policy to phase out nuclear energy after the Fukushima meltdown, Parliament is discussing a proposal to lift a ban on constructing new nuclear power plants. It could ultimately be put to a nationwide vote.
The fundamental hurdle for many nations is that restarting idled nuclear plants - to say nothing of new construction - is a slow-moving process, unlikely to alleviate current energy supply crunches, at least in the near term.
In Taiwan, even if a nuclear restart were approved in all quarters and sailed through the required inspection and permitting process, experts say it would take years to switch the reactors back on. One of Taiwan's plants has already been dormant for too long to be revived.
The protracted timelines have fueled criticism that leaders should instead prioritize renewable energy sources that proponents argue are safer, align with existing long-term climate goals and can be deployed more rapidly.
"Whenever an energy crisis occurs, the topic of nuclear power comes up from the perspective of energy security," said Hajime Matsukubo, the secretary general of the Citizens' Nuclear Information Center. Taking into account nuclear facilities' high costs and long construction times, "there is no immediate solution here," Mr. Matsukubo said. "It's far more rational to invest that money into renewable energy."
Other observers expressed frustration that governments recoiling from nuclear power after Fukushima merely exchanged one set of risks for another, leaving nations reliant on imported fuels.
 "We've wasted so much time," said Yang Chia-fa, a founder of the clean energy advocacy group Climate Vanguards, who also works for Taiwan's state-owned power company. Over the past few years, he has taken part in gatherings across the island to protest the end of nuclear energy. "If you knew you needed nuclear energy," Mr. Yang said, "why did you insist on a nuclear-free homeland in the first place?"
At an energy conference in Houston last month, Katherina Reiche, Germany's minister for economic affairs and energy, surprised industry attendees when she bemoaned Germany's earlier decision to phase out nuclear power.
After the Fukushima disaster, Germany was among the countries that reacted most aggressively, phasing out a nuclear fleet that once supplied a quarter of the nation's electricity.
Now, the war in the Middle East is causing gasoline, diesel and jet fuel prices to spike and putting stress on the "fragile recovery of Germany's economy," Ms. Reiche said. "The phaseout of nuclear was a huge mistake, a huge mistake, and we miss this energy," she added.


Some of the nuclear start-ups trying to obtain that plutonium say that transforming the waste into fuel is a better way to dispose of it.
On Tuesday, the Energy Department said that it had selected five companies to enter into "advanced negotiations" to potentially receive some surplus plutonium. That includes Oklo, a California-based nuclear power company, which plans to partner with Newcleo, a European developer of advanced nuclear reactors.
Using plutonium for fuel, Oklo and Newcleo said, could solve a looming problem: Energy firms want to build a new wave of nuclear reactors, but the United States can't yet make enough conventional fuel from uranium to supply the plants. Harvesting old plutonium stockpiles could provide a short-term fix.
"A lack of fuel is one of the biggest choke points in expanding nuclear power right now," said Jacob DeWitte, the chief executive of Oklo, which is developing a novel type of small reactor intended to run on plutonium. "This will help us get more nuclear power online faster."
The plan is not yet final, and companies will still have to negotiate with the federal government over how to secure and transfer the plutonium. In addition to Oklo, the Energy Department said it had also selected four other companies - Standard Nuclear, Exodys Energy, SHINE Technologies and Flibe Energy - to enter into advanced negotiations to receive the material under its Surplus Plutonium Utilization Program, which was established last year.
The program "is anticipated to help companies unlock the next level of private funding to broaden domestic nuclear fuel supplies, spur innovation on American recycling technologies, and unlock private sector funding to fuel the nation's nuclear renaissance," said Michael Goff, the principal deputy assistant secretary of nuclear energy, in a statement.
Oklo's stock price was up more than 4 percent on Tuesday after the company announced its involvement in the program.
The Energy Department has been debating for years what to do with the large amounts of plutonium in its possession.

But those plans changed again last May, when President Trump issued executive orders aimed at speeding up the construction of nuclear power plants in the United States. In one order, Mr. Trump told the Energy Department to identify any federally owned plutonium and once again explore converting it into fuel.

The companies say they are prepared to deal with logistical challenges.
In an interview, Stefano Buono, the chief executive of Newcleo, said his company planned to build a fuel fabrication facility in Savannah River, S.C., near the site of the canceled MOX project. He said Newcleo could succeed where previous efforts had failed.
"The last time this was tried, it was not run as a private company, and there were basically no clients for the fuel," said Mr. Buono. "We think we can do this at a very competitive cost." The plant, he said, could produce a wide range of nuclear fuels from MOX fuels to metallic plutonium fuels.
"If we can do this economically, we can also help reduce nuclear waste," he added. "That's the most sustainable option."
The Trump administration has set a goal of quadrupling the size of the U.S. nuclear fleet by 2050, and many companies are developing a new generation of advanced reactors that are meant to be smaller and easier to finance than older reactors.
Yet many of those advanced reactors will require a specialized type of enriched uranium for fuel, known as HALEU, and the United States has lost much of its enrichment capacity in recent decades. A large fraction of enriched uranium for nuclear power plants still comes from Russia. While the Energy Department is spending billions of dollars to build up domestic fuel supply chains, that will take years, and Oklo and Newcleo are betting they can create fuel from plutonium more quickly as a stopgap.
"The plutonium is ready now," said Caroline DeWitte, the chief operating officer of Oklo. "We just have to fabricate it."
Oklo is developing a type of so-called fast reactor that can run on either uranium fuel, recycled nuclear waste or plutonium. The company has been conducting experiments at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico on using plutonium as fuel.
Mr. Markey has raised concerns that Energy Secretary Chris Wright had previously sat on Oklo's board before joining the government. Mr. Wright has since divested his shares and has publicly pledged to "not participate personally and substantially" in decisions regarding Oklo.
Separately, the Trump administration is pursuing efforts to expand nuclear waste recycling and reprocessing, which could involve harvesting plutonium from the leftover waste of nuclear power plants and creating more fuel, something that France already does on a small scale.
To some experts, that is worthwhile. The world only has a finite amount of uranium. If nuclear power were to expand greatly across the planet, countries may eventually need some sort of reprocessing to power those reactors.
"If we're really serious about expanding humanity's use of nuclear power, then using plutonium makes a lot of sense," said Nick Touran, a nuclear engineer who runs the consultancy What Is Nuclear.
Yet nuclear waste recycling unnerves some nuclear nonproliferation experts. Starting in the 1970s, the United States sought to discourage other countries from reprocessing nuclear waste over concerns 

"Plutonium-based fuels and reprocessing have a poor track record when introduced in civilian nuclear energy programs," Ernest Moniz, a nuclear physicist who served as energy secretary during the Obama administration, wrote last year.
Trying to revive the efforts, he added, "would introduce long-recognized security risks and have the unintended consequence of impeding nuclear energy expansion just as momentum builds for such an outcome."

Less than six hours after Japan restarted one of the world's largest nuclear power plants, a technical malfunction forced the facility back offline, dealing a setback to the government's efforts to restore nuclear energy as a cornerstone of the nation's energy mix.
The plant's operator, Tokyo Electric Power Company, or TEPCO, said an alarm was triggered just after midnight Thursday. The utility had restarted Unit 6 of its Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant in northern Niigata Prefecture at 7 p.m. Wednesday, ending years of dormancy after the 2011 triple meltdown at the Fukushima Daiichi plant, which was caused by a tsunami and earthquake.
The alarm sounded on Thursday while technicians were adjusting Unit 6's control rods, the cylinders used to regulate or stop the power output of a nuclear reactor. Because the cause of the alarm could not be immediately identified, TEPCO opted to halt the reactor to conduct inspections.
TEPCO said that safety was its "top priority" and that it would announce the results of its investigation as soon as possible. In an earlier statement, the utility said that the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant was in stable condition and that there was no radioactive impact to the outside.
Fifteen years after the Fukushima disaster displaced more than 160,000 residents, Japan is reviving its nuclear sector to meet a growing demand for clean, stable and lower-cost electricity. The restart of the Niigata facility - which at full capacity is one of the world's largest nuclear complexes - was seen as a milestone in the country's push to bring more of its 33 operable reactors back online.
Before the 2011 disaster, Japan maintained one of the world's most extensive nuclear programs. In the years since, only 15 reactors, including the unit at Kashiwazaki-Kariwa, have resumed operation, largely because of a rigorous approval process from local and prefectural governments.
The restart was also a high-stakes test for TEPCO, the utility company that operated the doomed Fukushima plant in 2011 and has since struggled to regain public trust. A survey conducted by Niigata Prefecture in October found that 60 percent of residents believed conditions for a restart had not been met, while 70 percent expressed concerns regarding TEPCO's management of the site.
The final green light for Kashiwazaki-Kariwa's restart followed a December vote by Niigata's prefectural assembly to support the move, a resolution subsequently endorsed by the prefecture's governor.

Before we explain a big shift in Democratic messaging on climate, and a big milestone for solar power, let's get caught up:
NOAA declares that El Niño is here and flashing danger signs: Meteorologists said Thursday that an El Niño has formed in the tropical Pacific and will likely intensify in the coming months, setting off more extreme weather and higher temperatures around the world.
El Niño is the name given to a natural phenomenon that occurs every few years when trade winds shift and the Pacific Ocean warms. And if history is any guide, a powerful El Niño could hit hard.
TWO BIG SHIFTS
A big milestone and a changing message
Despite the Trump administration's attempts to slow the growth of renewable power, the cleanest source of energy is growing, while the dirtiest source is fading.
Last month, solar power overtook coal as an electricity source in the United States for the first time, according to Ember, an energy research firm.
It's a milestone both technical and symbolic.
Solar supplied 12.8 percent of U.S. electricity in May, edging out coal, which supplied just 12.2 percent. That was the highest ever share of electricity generation for solar, and the fourth-lowest monthly share for coal.
And it happened despite the number of new solar installations falling last year in the United States in the face of attacks from the Trump administration. Last week, the Trump administration also announced a total of $700 million in federal money to reinvigorate the domestic coal industry, which has been declining for years.
This wasn't the first time that a form of renewable energy has beaten out coal. Wind has supplied more electricity than coal several times over the past five years, Ember notes. And in March, renewables including nuclear power generated more electricity than gas, the biggest source of energy for the grid, for the first time
But the steady rise of solar reflects a sweeping global shift, with photovoltaic panels that are cheaper and more powerful than ever before.
Democrats change their tune
Yet even as solar continues its rise, Democrats are taking a more cautious approach when talking about climate change.
As Lisa Friedman and Brad Plumer write, many of the party's leaders are becoming less hostile to fossil fuels. The shift comes amid rising gas prices, higher energy bills, nagging inflation and an 18-month stretch during which the Trump administration has promoted oil, gas and coal interests.
In California, Xavier Becerra, a Democrat, emerged as the front-runner to be the state's next governor while taking campaign donations from fossil fuel companies and questioning the wisdom of California's most stringent climate goals, like ending sales of new gasoline-powered cars by 2035. In the state's nonpartisan primary, Becerra finished ahead of Tom Steyer, a billionaire investor and climate donor, who ran on a climate platform and called for breaking up utilities like PG&E.
In the Northeast, Democratic governors including Kathy Hochul of New York, Ned Lamont of Connecticut and Maura Healey of Massachusetts, have all expressed openness to new gas pipelines.
The shift has opened up a rift in the Democratic Party. While some leaders, including Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York and Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts still rail against oil and gas interests, many of their colleagues are becoming more accommodating to fossil fuel companies. And some activists are even no longer using "keep in it in the ground" as a rallying cry.
"It's something we are struggling with," said Cassidy DiPaola, a spokeswoman for Fossil Free Media, a nonprofit group, told the Times. "We are still committed as a movement to the ideas of keeping it in the ground, but as a campaign message, it's more effective to talk about building clean energy."
RENEWABLE ENERGY
The costs of delaying wind and solar
In a new study, the Corporate Energy Buyers Association, a business group that promotes emissions-free power sources, found that if no additional wind and solar energy were added to the grid, it would add $11.6 billion in annual electricity and natural gas costs to electricity bills for U.S. households.
Without those low-cost renewables coming online, electricity prices would rise sharply in the years ahead, the study found. The rate increases would be the highest for ratepayers in Texas.
Solar and wind are among the cheapest forms of energy right now. Yet barriers put up by the Trump administration, states and utilities can make it hard for consumers and businesses to access them. The federal government has come down particularly hard on the wind industry.
Beyond simply slowing the growth of renewables, the study found, these roadblocks also increase the use of natural gas and coal.
"We already see really significant delays on new large projects of all types," Rich Powell, chief executive of CEBA, said in an interview. "Our members are experiencing delays on both solar and wind."
In addition to reversing some of the recent Trump-era policies that have throttled wind and solar growth, Powell is calling for sweeping permitting reforms that would level the playing field for renewables. One specific change he'd like to see: "permit certainty." That is, making sure that a project that is approved during one presidential administration can't be undone by the political whims of the next administration.
Recent landslides in Indonesia devastated rare orangutans
The critically endangered Tapanuli orangutans found on the Indonesian island of Sumatra are a step closer to extinction, scientists found, after landslides last year that were fueled by climate change. More than 50 of the rare animals were estimated to have died in the landslides, out of a population of around 800.
The findings, published in the journal Current Biology on Wednesday, add a heavy ecological toll to a storm that caused mass human devastation, killing more than 1,000 people and displacing hundreds of thousands.
The analysis offers the latest example of how climate change is pummeling wildlife populations already depleted by decades or centuries of habitat loss and hunting. - Catrin Einhorn

See more of our coverage in your search results.Add The New York Times on Google 
From Western Europe to East Asia, countries are scouring the globe for natural gas after the war in Iran cut off the Persian Gulf fuel that they relied on to cook dinner, heat homes and generate electricity.
The United States, as the world's biggest gas exporter, will almost certainly benefit from this upheaval, at least in the short term.
But the war with Iran, now entering its second month, is also a reminder that importing gas is a risky proposition that can leave buyers exposed to high prices and shortages during geopolitical strife. That presents a big challenge to the oil and gas industry's plans to sell more natural gas - and creates an opening for alternatives like renewable energy, coal and nuclear power.
"What you're seeing with this type of volatility that seems to happen every four or five years, it's just not good," Jack Fusco, chief executive of a large U.S. gas exporter Cheniere Energy, said last week at a Houston energy conference, CERAWeek by S&P Global.
This is the second time in recent years that a war has caused natural gas prices to soar in many parts of the world. The last spike followed Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
Gas is still a lot less expensive than it was four years ago. But the Iran war is not over.
Analysts say that prices could rise significantly if Qatar, one of the world's largest gas exporters, is unable to restart gas shipments relatively soon. On the third day of the war, the country stopped preparing gas for export. Its facilities later sustained extensive damage that a state-owned energy company said would take several years to repair.
Buying and selling natural gas is not something countries do lightly. Shipping the fuel overseas requires significant, long-term investment. After natural gas is taken out of the ground, exporters have to chill it to negative 260 degrees Fahrenheit (negative 162 degrees Celsius) to turn it into liquid that can be transported on massive oceangoing tankers. Countries buying that liquefied natural gas, or L.N.G., need to build import terminals to turn the fuel back into gas and pipelines to get it to utilities, factories and homes.
Having invested in a lot of that expensive kit, some countries now find themselves without a reliable supply of gas.
The loss of Qatar's supply is so significant because the country ordinarily sells about 20 percent of the world's L.N.G. Other exporters don't have enough extra capacity to quickly make up for all of that.
Already, officials in Japan, Bangladesh and Thailand, which typically buy gas from Qatar, have taken steps to burn more coal to produce electricity. South Korea, meantime, is urging residents to conserve energy, including by taking shorter showers.
At the same time, buyers are competing for cargoes of L.N.G. produced outside of the Persian Gulf. That had many American companies riding high last week at the conference in Houston. Many executives expect that they will be able to build more export terminals and charge higher prices. New gas projects in places like Canada or Argentina could also advance as importers look to diversify.
"U.S. producers are positioned to be enormous winners," said Meg Gentle, who previously led a Houston-based L.N.G. developer.
But there can be too much of a good thing. The longer the war disrupts the global energy trade, the more likely it is that importing countries will try to insulate themselves from future shocks by developing energy domestically or taking steps to conserve. Europe now uses an estimated 16 percent less natural gas than it did in 2021, the year before Russia invaded Ukraine, according to the International Energy Agency.
"The credibility of L.N.G. and gas imports really has taken a hit," said Ira Joseph, a senior research associate at Columbia University's Center on Global Energy Policy. "Because of Russia first and now Qatar."
Higher gas prices also make alternatives more attractive. Take Asia, which the I.E.A. was expecting to help drive a 9 percent expansion in global gas demand by 2030, fed partly by a nearly 50 percent expansion in global L.N.G. supply. Growth could slow if countries switch to other energy sources because they cannot secure enough L.N.G. or can no longer afford it.
Last week, Goldman Sachs raised its forecast L.N.G. prices in Asia by 15 percent for the second half of the year. By 2028, the investment bank said, L.N.G. is likely to be around 57 percent more expensive in Asia than it had expected before the war. Goldman made similar changes to its natural gas price forecasts for Europe.
"Everyone will ask questions," said Brendan Duval, chief executive of Glenfarne, which is developing natural-gas export terminals in the United States. "Like if you're in India," he said, "they're very price sensitive, so are they going to go, 'All right, let's not get too exposed to L.N.G. because this could happen every three years?'"
"But," Mr. Duval added, "everyone's got short memories."
Energy executives who are not in the business of selling L.N.G. said importers would have a strong reason to consider other options.
"If you're a country that doesn't have fossil fuels, you're relying on imports, you're going to look to protect yourself," said John Ketchum, chief executive of NextEra Energy, which owns and operates renewable energy projects as well as nuclear and gas-fired power plants in the United States. "One of the ways you can protect yourself is with renewables and storage - or nuclear."
Some world leaders may look to China as an example. Over the last 20 years, that country has pushed hard to reduce its reliance on imported oil and gas, motivated mainly by worries about energy security rather than concerns about climate change.
It has built hundreds of power plants that burn domestically produced coal, installed more wind and solar power than the rest of the world combined and is building dozens of nuclear power plants. The country also fostered a cutting-edge electric vehicle industry. And while China still buys a lot of L.N.G., it can use less gas during crises, said Mr. Joseph of Columbia.
Nations have other options. They could develop their own domestic gas supplies or invest in more gas storage capacity to weather large disruptions, according to analysts at Wood Mackenzie, a consulting firm. But both would take time to have a meaningful impact.
So far, American consumers and businesses have been spared higher natural gas prices. That's because the United States is such a big producer and gas is hard enough to transport that prices tend to be set regionally rather than worldwide.
But if there is a lot more demand for U.S. gas in the coming years - and less supply from Qatar - prices most likely will rise in the United States, too. Goldman Sachs recently raised its forecast for U.S. natural gas prices in 2028 by more than 30 percent.

Contention over the war in Iran could undermine the talks. Without naming Mr. Trump, Mr. Xi last month criticized the flouting of international law as a "return to the law of the jungle."
While China is prodding Iranian officials to negotiate with the United States, it has held back from doing more to help resolve a war that Beijing sees as Washington's problem. The Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi, met his Iranian counterpart, Abbas Araghchi, last week in Beijing. Mr. Wang called for greater efforts to open the strait but also said China supported Iran's "legitimate right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy."

When the U.S. Treasury imposed sanctions on a Chinese refinery in April for buying Iranian oil, China ordered its companies not to comply and issued regulations giving authorities powers to investigate foreign companies and governments.

European Union officials unveiled a broad plan on Wednesday to reduce dependence on American technology, which they increasingly see as a threat to the region's economic future and geopolitical security amid a rocky relationship with the Trump administration.
Under the plan, officials outlined more government involvement in the region's tech industry to accelerate the construction of data centers and revive its semiconductor industry. It would also push European governments and businesses to purchase technology from domestic suppliers, while potentially barring American firms from cloud computing contracts seen as critical to security.
European leaders have become increasingly alarmed by the reliance on American technology in areas like artificial intelligence, cloud computing and semiconductors. Many worry the dependence creates a "kill switch" that the Trump administration or future U.S. presidents could exploit to block access to essential tech services.
"We cannot afford to depend on others for the technologies that keep our hospitals running, our energy grids stable and our services secure," said Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, the executive branch of the 27-nation bloc, in a statement.
By adopting more protectionist economic policies, the so-called technology sovereignty package could further strain Europe's relationship with the Trump administration after past disagreements over trade, the war in Ukraine and control of Greenland. Jamieson Greer, the U.S. trade representative, previously threatened retaliation against Europe over its digital policies.
European officials are working to carry out a trade pact with the United States, and President Trump has told them they must finish by July 4. The European Parliament is expected to vote on the package in mid-June, just ahead of that deadline.
The Computer and Communications Industry Association, an industry trade group, called the tech package "discriminatory" against companies based outside Europe.
"By excluding trusted international technology providers based on their headquarters location and organizational structure, the commission forces users to rely on a much more limited selection of digital products," the group said in statement.
The tech package is part of a wider strategy shift to drive economic growth. Europe has been squeezed between the United States' dominance in technology and China's strength in manufacturing. The European Union ran a trade deficit with China of about 145 billion euros in the first three months of this year, worth about $170 billion, driven in part by an influx of Chinese-made machinery and electric vehicles.
The European Commission said the bloc relied on foreign providers for over 80 percent of its digital products, services, infrastructure and intellectual property. The American companies Amazon, Google and Microsoft dominate the European cloud computing market. Semiconductors and other vital components primarily come from companies based in the United States and Asia. European companies have also struggled to get a foothold in the fast-growing A.I. market, which is led by Anthropic and OpenAI of Silicon Valley.
After more than a decade of aggressively regulating Apple, Google, Meta and others, many European leaders now want to develop a bigger tech ecosystem to compete with those U.S. giants.
"The European Union stands at a defining moment to assert its technological sovereignty and reclaim its place in the global race for geoeconomic power," the European Commission said in the proposal.
Many parts of the new tech package could take a year or more to become law. The proposals must wind their way through a lawmaking process that requires agreement on a deal by European countries and the 720-member European Parliament.
A major focus of the E.U. initiative, called the Cloud and A.I. Development Act, is boosting European cloud computing companies. For some tasks handling sensitive government work and public data, non-European providers would be limited from winning contracts.
The draft bill also encourages construction of data centers by speeding up permits, providing reliable electricity and investing government funds. The European Union says it wants to at least triple its data center capacity by 2030.
Another piece of the package, the Chips Act 2.0, attempts to increase demand for semiconductors among European businesses, including automobile and defense firms. The proposal builds on a 2023 law aimed at bolstering chip manufacturing.
European officials said the tech plan was not about replacing American technology, but about building resiliency so governments and companies in the region were not reliant on one foreign supplier. The policies are expected to benefit European companies, including the business software giant SAP of Germany, the artificial intelligence company Mistral of France and the cloud computing firm OVHcloud of France.
Officials in Brussels have already eased other regulations to encourage tech development, including delaying some rules related to A.I. The European Commission also might create a fund to invest directly in domestic businesses - including semiconductors and advanced manufacturing - in exchange for ownership stakes. Countries like France have adopted policies to build data centers by promising access to affordable nuclear energy.
Some government bodies are already making the switch from American tech. On Wednesday, the European Parliament said it would move to the French search engine Qwant from Google.
 
Atomic fusion has long been seen as the ultimate source of clean energy because of all its advantages over fission, the process that has powered nuclear power plants for nearly eight decades.
It's safer - no chain reactions, no meltdowns. It would leave no long-lasting radioactive waste. And it would use fuels that are cheaper and more abundant, providing an attractive source of round-the-clock, emissions-free energy that could help stop climate change.
Now, one leading fusion start-up has decided the best way to beat fission might be to embrace it.
Zap Energy, a nine-year-old company in Everett, Wash., said on Wednesday that it had begun developing a small fission reactor, one that would be cheaper and less complex to build than existing nuclear reactors.
Zap isn't moving away from fusion, Benj Conway, the company's president and co-founder, said in an interview. Fission and fusion are opposite processes; the former splits atoms while the latter melds them. Even so, there are commonalities in engineering that give Zap and its particular design for a fusion reactor a head start in fission, Mr. Conway said.
Plus, developing fission reactors will give the company experience in obtaining regulatory approvals and building to commercial safety standards, he said. That experience will be important when the company starts building fusion plants.
By pursuing fission, "we'll be building fusion power plants much, much earlier than we would be doing otherwise," Mr. Conway said. Zap hopes to bring its fission reactor to market in the early 2030s.
Other start-ups around the country are also aiming to build small, next-generation fission reactors. But none of them started out in fusion.
Electricity demand is surging as data centers multiply, and the Trump administration is encouraging new nuclear plants to play a big role in meeting it. The administration is supporting fusion development as well, and a few fusion start-ups say their experimental devices are close to producing more power than they consume, the key breakthrough that has eluded fusion machines for decades. Still, most experts say fusion remains decades away from supporting the grid at large scale.
America's best-funded fusion start-up, Commonwealth Fusion Systems, plans to build its first power plant in Virginia and turn it on the early 2030s. Helion Energy (which, like Zap, is based in Everett) is constructing a facility in eastern Washington that it says will deliver power to Microsoft in 2028.
Most fusion machines use either superstrong magnets or high-power lasers to cause plasma atoms to combine and release energy. Zap is working on a simpler device, one that achieves fusion by zapping plasma with electricity. The company hopes that, with no giant magnets or lasers, its reactors will be smaller and cheaper to build.
The design of Zap's fusion reactor also shows promise for so-called hybrid nuclear systems that braid together fission and fusion. The company's work in fission should help it develop hybrids down the road, Mr. Conway said.
According to Fusion Energy Base, a website that tracks the industry, Zap has raised $330 million from investors including the oil giants Chevron and Shell, the Japanese bank Mizuho and Breakthrough Energy Ventures, a venture capital firm founded by Bill Gates.
Zap's experimental devices have crossed several technical milestones in recent years. "The fusion work's going well, and fusion's coming," said Zabrina Johal, Zap's newly appointed chief executive. "But there's massive demand and need right now" for nuclear power, and the company can help fulfill it while continuing its core mission, Ms. Johal said.
Zap isn't the first fusion start-up with a side hustle. Some sell magnets. Others produce radioactive substances used to diagnose and treat health conditions. One start-up, Marathon Fusion, says it has developed a method for using fusion reactors to turn mercury into gold.
Such efforts aren't necessarily a sign that the prospects for fusion energy are dimming, said Sam Wurzel, the researcher who runs Fusion Energy Base. Commercial fusion is a colossal challenge, and generating revenue helps companies secure investment to fund research and development, he said. "In some ways, I see it as just responsible stewardship of investor funds."
Zap is first aiming to build a 10-megawatt fission reactor, enough to power several thousand homes. The company is targeting users like remote data centers, logistics warehouses and isolated military bases, with devices that could be built in a factory and delivered by truck, train or cargo plane.
Most nuclear reactors today are cooled with highly pressurized water, but Zap's would use liquid sodium. That would allow it to operate at lower pressures and with less shielding, helping it to be cooled more efficiently.
The challenge for many first-of-a-kind reactor technologies would be cost, said Jacopo Buongiorno, a professor of nuclear science and engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The energy such machines produce is likely to be very expensive, at least to start, he said.
"It is true that data centers are willing to pay more for electricity that is carbon free and stable, and nuclear provides that," Dr. Buongiorno said. "But how much more?"

A novel type of nuclear power plant in Wyoming backed by Bill Gates received a key federal permit on Wednesday, making it the first new U.S. commercial reactor in nearly a decade to receive clearance to begin construction.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the federal body that oversees reactor safety, unanimously voted to grant a construction permit to TerraPower, a start-up founded by Mr. Gates. TerraPower is one of several companies trying to build a new wave of smaller, advanced reactors meant to be easier to build than the large reactors of old.
The permit, which comes after years of consultations and regulatory reviews, means that TerraPower can begin pouring concrete and building the nuclear components of its proposed nuclear plant in Kemmerer, Wyo. The plant, which still faces plenty of logistical hurdles, is currently expected to come online in 2031 near an old coal-burning power plant that is slated to retire a few years later.
"Today is a historic day for the United States nuclear industry," Chris Levesque, TerraPower's chief executive, said in a statement. "This is the first commercial-scale, advanced nuclear plant to receive this permit."
Nuclear power has seen a resurgence of bipartisan interest in the United States in recent years, especially as demand for electricity rises. Nuclear reactors don't emit planet-warming greenhouse gases, unlike coal and gas plants, and they can produce electricity around the clock, unlike wind turbines and solar panels. While some Democrats remain opposed because of concerns about safety and disposal of nuclear waste, others have come to see it as a crucial technology for fighting climate change.
One of the big obstacles facing nuclear power, however, has been the time and enormous expense it takes to build new plants. The only two U.S. reactors built from scratch in the past three decades, at the Vogtle nuclear power plant in Georgia, cost $35 billion, double the initial estimates, and arrived seven years behind schedule.
TerraPower is one of more than a dozen start-ups across the United States betting that new technology and designs can make it easier and cheaper to build reactors.
Today, every American nuclear plant uses light-water reactor technology, in which water is pumped into a reactor core and heated by atomic fission, producing steam to create electricity. Because the water is highly pressurized, these plants need heavy piping and thick containment shields to protect against accidents.
TerraPower's reactor, by contrast, uses liquid sodium instead of water, allowing it to operate at lower pressures. In theory, that reduces the need for costly shielding. In an emergency, the plant can be cooled with air vents rather than complicated pump systems. The reactor is just 345 megawatts, one-third the size of Vogtle's reactors, making for a smaller investment.
TerraPower's design has another unique feature. Most reactors can't easily adjust their power output, making it hard to mesh with fluctuating wind and solar farms to adjust to grid demands. TerraPower's reactor will have a molten salt battery that allows the plant to ramp up or down as needed.
While the initial plant built in Wyoming is expected to be expensive - $4 billion or more - the company hopes to drive down the cost in the future by building more plants and learning from experience. (The Energy Department has agreed to pick up part of the cost of TerraPower's first reactor.)
"Our first plant will cost more than our tenth plant, because we have all these non-recurring initial costs," Mr. Levesque said in an interview. He predicted that TerraPower's reactors would eventually produce electricity at half the cost of traditional nuclear plants because they are simpler.
Any new nuclear reactor needs formal approval from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which is supposed to conduct a thorough safety review. In the past, some nuclear companies and proponents had criticized the N.R.C. for being too sluggish, overly strict and incapable of dealing with novel reactor designs. In 2024, Congress overwhelmingly passed a law aimed at speeding up the agency's reviews.
Those changes appear to have had an impact. The N.R.C. reviewed TerraPower's construction permit application in just 18 months - far faster than the 27 months it had initially estimated.
Some nuclear opponents have accused the commission of rushing its review. "Make no mistake, this type of reactor has major safety flaws compared to conventional nuclear reactors that comprise the operating fleet," Edwin Lyman, the director of nuclear power safety at the Union of Concerned Scientists and a frequent critic of the industry, said in December after the N.R.C. finished its safety review. "Its liquid sodium coolant can catch fire, and the reactor has inherent instabilities."
Mr. Levesque said the company went through a "rigorous" review process, spending more than four years and more than 60 meetings with the commission's staff to assuage their concerns and filing detailed technical reports on various aspects of the reactor's design. "We've been able to show that it's very, very safe," he said.
With its construction permit in hand, the company says it plans to start work on the Wyoming reactor in the coming weeks. The company had already broken ground on the site in 2024 and had begun building the nonnuclear parts of the plant, which did not require a permit.
TerraPower has already had to push back its start date several times, and it will still face hurdles in trying to avoid the snags and cost overruns that have plagued other reactor projects as well as securing the fuel it needs. Before coming online, the reactor will also need to secure a separate operating license from the N.R.C., which has told the company it will continue to monitor several safety issues.
TerraPower plans to sell electricity from its first plant to PacificCorp, a utility in the Northwest. The company has also agreed to supply up to eight reactors to Meta to power its data centers in the coming years.
Separately, President Trump has ordered a sweeping overhaul of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and the agency is expected to unveil thousands of pages of proposed regulatory changes in the coming weeks that could affect how quickly it approves future reactors, as well as rules around safety limits for radiation exposure.

In 2011, Ayako Oga fled her home in Fukushima Prefecture after three reactors melted down at the Fukushima Daiichi plant, blanketing eastern Japan in radioactive particles.
Ms. Oga and more than 160,000 other evacuees were eventually resettled across the country. She moved to Niigata, a quiet agricultural prefecture on Japan's western coast that took in many evacuees fleeing Fukushima. There, the local nuclear station had been idled after the disaster, and prevailing winds had largely spared the region from the plume.
A farmer by trade, Ms. Oga, 53, tested the Niigata soil and found radiation levels comparable to pre-disaster Fukushima. She began growing carrots and other vegetables on a small plot, selling the surplus at a local roadside market. "It's so beautiful here," she said. "Moving here and farming again has made me feel so happy."
Fifteen years after an 8.9-magnitude earthquake sent a tsunami crashing into the coastline and knocked out the Fukushima plant's cooling system, memories of the nuclear crisis are receding in Japan.
The country, like many others, is turning to nuclear power to meet skyrocketing demand for carbon-free, round-the-clock electricity to power chip factories and the data centers needed for artificial intelligence. At an accelerating pace, Japan is moving to set aside concerns and restart reactors that have been mothballed for more than a decade.
On Wednesday, Tokyo Electric Power, or TEPCO - the same utility that operated the Fukushima plant - restarted the first reactor, Unit 6, at its Kashiwazaki-Kariwa complex, one of the world's largest nuclear facilities. The restart was delayed by a day after a safety alarm failed to sound during a test over the weekend. The plant sits about 40 miles from Ms. Oga's home in Niigata.
Many energy analysts and officials say nuclear power is vital to meeting surging electricity demand, curbing utility costs and reducing Japan's heavy reliance on imported fossil fuels. Unit 6 generates enough power to supply more than one million homes and will primarily serve the Tokyo metropolitan area.
For Ms. Oga, however, the restart of Kashiwazaki-Kariwa underscores a lopsided exchange - one that mirrors the situation in Fukushima, where electricity is channeled to urban centers from rural communities that shoulder the risk of hosting nuclear facilities.
With the plant's restart, "a life of constant daily vigilance is beginning again," Ms. Oga said. "To be honest, I'm terrified," she added. "But I've put down roots here."
Before the Fukushima disaster, Japan had one of the world's most extensive nuclear programs, but over the past 15 years, the country has been slow to revive its nuclear facilities. Only 15 of its 33 operational reactors have restarted, largely because of a rigorous approval process from local and prefectural governments.
In Kashiwazaki, the city that hosts the plant, Mayor Masahiro Sakurai backed Unit 6's restart after it met stringent standards set by Japan's nuclear safety agency.
Niigata has long served as an energy hub. Kashiwazaki is known as the birthplace of Japan's modern oil industry, with the discovery of significant deposits here in the 1880s. The city's municipal office sits on the former headquarters of Japan's first oil major, Nippon Oil. By the 1960s, the region pivoted toward nuclear power.
Mayor Masahiro Sakurai in a dark suit, red tie and glasses stands by a large window. Outside, a snowy town and distant mountains are visible.
Through its years of operation, the local nuclear plant has both sustained the local economy - employing thousands and generating tax and grant revenue - and provided Japan with a stable, clean source of power, Mr. Sakurai said.
"We take pride in the fact that Kashiwazaki has supported the Japanese economy through energy - first oil, now nuclear," he said.
Before 2011, nuclear provided about 30 percent of Japan's electricity. Since then, the nation has struggled to scale offshore wind and solar power, leaving it reliant on imported natural gas and coal for roughly two-thirds of its needs. Japan spent nearly $70 billion on imported liquefied natural gas and coal last year.
Given limitations to renewables and Japan's pledge to reach carbon neutrality, "the only practical option is nuclear," said Tatsuya Terazawa, chairman and chief executive of the Institute of Energy Economics, Japan, a think tank.
For the first time since 2011, national polls have shown that a majority of the public supports restarting offline reactors. The Japanese government aims to derive about 20 percent of the nation's energy from nuclear by 2030, up from less than 10 percent currently, which would require restarting nearly all of its plants.
Despite the recent momentum, significant barriers complicated a swift return, Mr. Terazawa said. Chief among them is the lack of public trust in the utilities that operate the plants, alongside the fraught process of securing local government consent.
In many host communities, residents have conditioned their approval of plant restarts on the construction of reinforced evacuation routes. In Niigata, local officials pressured the central government and TEPCO to fund an infrastructure overhaul as a prerequisite for the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa restart, yet the plant resumed operations even as many road and shelter projects remained unfinished.
 "If an earthquake coincided with an accident, evacuation would be impossible," said Ken Ofuchi, a member of the Niigata Prefectural Assembly. He noted that heavy winter snows often paralyzed local roads and argued that restarting the plant without new infrastructure could leave a multiyear safety gap
The other primary point of contention is TEPCO. Niigata Prefecture released a survey in October that found that 60 percent of residents did not believe the conditions for restarting the plant were in place, and about 70 percent expressed concerns about TEPCO's management of the site.
Some critics argue that TEPCO ignored tsunami warnings before 2011 to save costs. In the years since, the company has faced backlash for transparency lapses and technical delays in decommissioning the Fukushima site.
Since 2011, TEPCO has held numerous meetings with Niigata residents to explain the disaster-prevention measures put in place at Kashiwazaki-Kariwa. Last year, it pledged more than $600 million in investment into the prefecture over the next decade.
In a statement, TEPCO said, "We keep at the forefront of our minds that there are those who feel anxious about our restarting of nuclear reactors." TEPCO will "work tirelessly" to improve the safety of the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa power station, it said.
The decision to greenlight the restart came after a vote in December by Niigata's prefectural assembly to approve a petition supporting the move, which Gov. Hideyo Hanazumi endorsed. Mr. Hanazumi had pledged to "seek the public's mandate" before granting consent - a phrase some residents interpreted as a promise for a direct referendum. Instead, the governor cited the assembly's vote as representative of the public will.
"It is an insult to democracy," said Hitoshi Nakayama, a Niigata City Council member. That is the "unfortunate reality" of the endemic "warped structure" of nuclear power, Mr. Nakayama said. "Local will is influenced by grants and subsidies, while risk is pushed onto a local region for the sake of massive energy consumption in a major city."
In Kashiwazaki, Mayor Sakurai sees the plan to restart the plant differently. Beyond the economic benefits, he framed the decision as a necessity to combat climate change - a crisis that he said affected locals as much as the rest of Japan.
Mr. Sakurai said his eyes had been opened to how quickly global warming was progressing on a recent trip to the Himalayas, where he saw snowmelt overflowing hydropower dams. In Kashiwazaki, he has pushed an initiative to decarbonize the city through a mix of solar megaprojects and battery storage.
Sitting in his office, he pointed to Mount Yoneyama, a bell-shaped peak that towers over Kashiwazaki. In January, it was only partly dusted in snow. "Climate change is undeniably advancing," Mr. Sakurai said, adding that salmon, a major industry in Niigata, are not returning to local rivers because of rising sea temperatures.
"To prevent its advance, we need stable, carbon-free electricity," he said. "Therefore, for the time being, I believe nuclear is necessary in Kashiwazaki."

The reactor exploded early on April 26, 1986, sending a column of fire and radioactive debris high above the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the Soviet Union.
The fallout settled over the streets, schools and playgrounds of nearby cities like Pripyat. Trace amounts of particles were eventually detected across the Northern Hemisphere. It was the world's largest ever accidental release of radioactive material.
In the beginning, the Soviet Union said little about the explosion, which was triggered by a safety test and exacerbated by design flaws. Officials obfuscated and denied. After radiation levels rose in Sweden, Soviet officials acknowledged that something had gone wrong. But they hid the scale of the disaster for months, even from the thousands of people sent to fix it.
Firefighters, miners, soldiers and civilians - who would come to be known as "liquidators" - shoveled debris and sealed the shattered reactor, without fully understanding the risks. They sometimes paid with their lives.
Pripyat was evacuated 36 hours after the disaster. Thousands of other residents nearby were ordered to do the same in the weeks and months that followed. The city and dozens of villages were left to rot. This corner of the Soviet Union became known as the Chernobyl exclusion zone, an area roughly the size of Rhode Island that remains restricted. The Soviet Union fell apart; Chernobyl remains in Ukraine.
These photographs - some taken in the first days after the explosion, others many years later - illustrate the immediate response, the evacuation and what was left behind.
But the risks from the high levels of radiation were significant. In this photograph, a doctor checked a girl's thyroid gland as other children waited their turns at a school in eastern Belarus, which neighbors Ukraine. At least 1,800 cases of thyroid cancer were documented in children who were under 14 when the accident occurred, a far higher rate than normal.
Miners wore little protection in May 1986 as they dug a tunnel beneath the exploded reactor. They were trying to prevent molten nuclear fuel from reaching the groundwater, which would have caused a far more dangerous release of radiation.
Employees continued working at the Chernobyl plant a few months after the disaster. The explosion destroyed Reactor 4. The plant's other reactors kept running for years.
A child from a contaminated area underwent medical examinations at a diagnostic clinic for radiation medicine in Minsk, Belarus, in 1991. Belarus received the largest share of Chernobyl's fallout, more than Ukraine or Russia.
Children playing in Slavutych, a city built about 25 miles east of Chernobyl in the year 2000 to house displaced workers and their families. It replaced Pripyat, where residents never returned.
A stray dog sitting in front of Reactor 4 and a new steel confinement structure being built in 2013 to enclose the original concrete "sarcophagus" that was starting to decay. Many dogs in the exclusion zone are descendants of pets left behind during the evacuation.
Bumper cars in an abandoned amusement park in Pripyat in 2023. The city was founded in 1970 to house Chernobyl workers, less than two miles from the plant.
Soldiers from Ukraine's National Guard training this month in the Chernobyl exclusion zone. The area, closed after the 1986 disaster, was held by Russian forces for more than a month in 2022, when fighting in the zone damaged power lines and temporarily cut electricity to the plant.

The war in Iran is choking off oil and gas supplies and spiking energy prices across the globe. And for many environmentalists, that's a powerful argument for countries to curb their use of fossil fuels and shift to wind, solar and other renewable sources.
Some countries in Europe and Asia may try to install more wind turbines, solar panels and batteries to buffer themselves against surges in the price of natural gas, as many did after Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022. If oil prices stay elevated, electric cars could become a more economical option for drivers from Brazil to the United States.
"This newest upheaval shows yet again that fossil fuel dependence leaves economies, businesses, markets and people at the mercy of each new conflict," said Simon Stiell, the United Nations climate chief. Investing in renewable energy, he said, is "the obvious pathway to energy security."

But as the chaos forces nations to rethink their energy policies, some countries could respond to the supply crunch by burning more coal - a highly polluting fossil fuel, but cheap and readily available - or embracing American natural gas. And if the Iran conflict causes interest rates to rise, that could make new renewable energy systems more expensive, analysts said.
The Trump administration, for its part, has been urging nations to use more oil and gas and is pitching the United States as a stable supplier of fossil fuels in a dangerous geopolitical era.
"It's like an inkblot test," said David Victor, a professor of public policy at the University of California, San Diego. "The war has reminded everybody of the powerful importance of energy security. And with that reminder, you have radically different responses."
The war also underscores a notable shift in the global energy landscape. For years, many world leaders declared tackling global warming a top priority and called for a shift to cleaner energy sources that didn't heat the planet. But recently, rising geopolitical and trade risks have spurred countries to look for homegrown sources of any kind of energy. That could include solar or nuclear power but also coal or gas.
A scramble for energy
The fighting in the Middle East has already exposed vulnerabilities in global energy markets. Roughly 20 percent of the world's oil and much of its natural gas normally travels by ship through the Strait of Hormuz, a narrow waterway off the southern coast of Iran.
Since the war began, Iran has been attacking tankers in the strait and traffic has slowed to a crawl, cutting off critical energy supplies. International oil prices rose by as much as one-third before dropping somewhat over the past few days.
The shock waves have been profound.
Qatar, which supplies one-fifth of the world's liquefied natural gas, has halted gas production, leading to price spikes and factory shutdowns in faraway countries that rely on the fuel, including India, South Korea and Taiwan. In Vietnam, "sold out" signs are appearing at gasoline stations. In Pakistan, officials have urged four-day workweeks to save energy. Hungary and Croatia have imposed price controls on domestic fuels.

In the short term, many countries are racing to secure energy supplies wherever they can. That often means scrambling for oil, gas and coal, which together still provide 80 percent of the world's energy needs.
In Thailand, which typically imports much of its natural gas from Qatar, officials have ordered domestic coal plants to run at full capacity and the national oil and gas company to maximize local production to make up the shortfall. In Taiwan, officials have broached the possibility of restarting a shuttered coal plant.
In Europe, where natural gas prices have spiked more than 75 percent since the war began, nations are buying more U.S. liquefied natural gas, outbidding poorer countries like Pakistan and Bangladesh.
"In the short term, countries will get energy wherever they can find it," said Kevin Book, managing director of ClearView Energy Partners, a research firm. "But in the long run, there's room for a rethink."
Rethinking oil and gas imports
Depending on the length and severity of the Iran conflict, some nations could seek to reduce their reliance on oil and gas imports from the Middle East in the coming years, experts said.
That could be a boon for U.S. gas exporters who can offer an alternative to gas shipped through the Strait of Hormuz. Over the past decade, thanks to advances in fracking technology, the United States has become by far the world's biggest supplier of liquefied natural gas, a form of gas that has been cooled for shipment. U.S. companies are expected to double export capacity by 2031.
"The security argument for Qatari gas has really been undermined, and this is going to bolster the case for a lot of new L.N.G. projects out there," said Ira Joseph, a scholar at Columbia University's Center on Global Energy Policy.
Some countries in Southeast Asia and elsewhere could also turn to domestic sources of coal, the dirtiest of the fossil fuels but also widely available in many parts of the world. In recent years, nations like India, Indonesia, Bangladesh and Pakistan have all been developing new coal plants, and global coal consumption has reached record highs.
"If your goal is domestically produced energy and you're South Africa or Indonesia or China, coal looks pretty good from energy security standpoint," said Jason Bordoff, the founding director of the Center on Global Energy Policy.
A far less polluting option would be for countries to invest in renewable energy sources like wind and solar power, which do not require fuel and could help insulate them from volatile swings in gas and oil markets.
After Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022 and cut off gas supplies, Europe stepped up its investment in solar power, with installations surging from roughly 40 gigawatts per year to nearly 65 gigawatts per year. (One gigawatt produces roughly enough electricity at peak output to power 300,000 homes.)
Last year, nations spent more than $780 billion on renewable energy, according to the International Energy Agency, more than they invested in oil infrastructure.
"My expectation, if post-Ukraine energy development is any indicator, is that it will accelerate further in countries that do not have access to fossil fuels," said Ani Dasgupta, head of the World Resources Institute, an environmental group.
A recent analysis from BloombergNEF, a research firm, suggested that the Iran conflict could give a boost to solar power and batteries, both of which have been rapidly falling in cost. Still, there are some obstacles that markets like Europe and India will need to overcome, including grid congestion, land constraints and regulatory bottlenecks.
Nuclear power is another option. In Japan, which is highly dependent on imported natural gas, officials have been gradually restarting nuclear plants that were closed in 2011 after a reactor meltdown at Fukushima. Those efforts could take on a new urgency, since each nuclear plant generally displaces gas power.
Because clean energy and fossil fuels could both benefit, it is unclear what the shifting energy landscape would mean for greenhouse gas emissions.
A case in point is China, which over the last 20 years has pushed hard to reduce its reliance on imported oil and gas - seemingly motivated far more by concern about energy security than climate change.
China has fostered a cutting-edge electric vehicle industry, installed more wind and solar power than the rest of the world combined and is constructing dozens of nuclear power plants. But the country has also built hundreds of coal-burning power plants and - despite the heavy focus on renewables - has quickly become the world's biggest emitter of planet-warming greenhouse gases, helping to push global temperatures to new highs.

The electric car calculus
The situation is somewhat different in the United States.
Because natural gas markets are highly regional, America's record gas production has kept the nation relatively protected from price shocks there. Natural gas is the biggest source of electricity in the United States, and the fact that it remains cheap means that other sources like wind, solar or nuclear power are unlikely to get any particular boost from the Iran conflict.
Yet the price of oil, which is traded globally, has been rising, which in turn has made gasoline more expensive for drivers in the United States. That could make electric vehicles more competitive, according to a separate analysis by BloombergNEF.
Today, U.S. gasoline prices are averaging around $3.50 per gallon. If prices were to climb to around $4.00 per gallon, the total cost of owning an electric car like the Tesla Model Y would be roughly similar to the total cost of owning a gasoline-burning Toyota RAV 4, because of the lower fuel costs, the analysis found.
Still, there are plenty of complications, said Ethan Zindler, head of country and policy research at BloombergNEF.
"Consumers would need to believe that prices are going to stay where they are," he said.
The United States, Canada and Europe have also put tariffs and other trade barriers on Chinese electric vehicles, which are some of the cheapest on the market today. Some experts wonder whether those dynamics could change if prices stay high for long enough.
"The question is when does this crisis go on long enough that it starts to change people's longer term thinking about energy policy and energy strategy," said Mr. Zindler. "The higher that prices go, the bigger the shifts we could see." 

NASA is getting serious about building a base on the moon.
After years of talking about lunar outposts in vague terms for sometime in the indefinite future, leaders of the space agency on Tuesday put a continuing American presence at the moon solidly on their road map for the coming decade, setting out specific plans and timelines.
Jared Isaacman, who began serving as NASA administrator in December, portrayed the agency's plans as important steps toward establishing civilization's first foothold on another world over the next decade.
"There will be an evolutionary path to building humanity's first permanent surface outpost beyond Earth," Mr. Isaacman said in a keynote address that welcomed an auditorium full of representatives from aerospace companies, international space agency officials and members of Congress.
That, he said, would also inspire people growing up much as the Apollo moon landings did a half-century ago.
"This is the moment where we should all start believing again, when ideas become missions and when hard work delivers world-changing accomplishments," Mr. Isaacman said. "NASA once changed everything, and we're going to do it again."
Mr. Isaacman is a billionaire entrepreneur who twice traveled to low-Earth orbit on space missions he financed. During his brief tenure at NASA, he has made a series of ambitious but reasonable announcements that appear to have the buy-in of both aerospace companies and key members of Congress.
He has also provided a measure of focus and stability at the agency during a period of turmoil and uncertainty at NASA. About a fifth of NASA employees accepted offers to leave, part of efforts by the Trump administration to downsize the federal government.
He and other NASA officials repeatedly said on Tuesday that they were trying to accomplish the "near impossible."
He ticked off a list of other NASA objectives as well, including launching a nuclear-propelled spacecraft to Mars by the end of 2028.
An Architect Opts for 'Optimistic Modernism' in Her Silver Lake Kitchen
And he made a passing reference to China's accelerating space ambitions - "a real geopolitical rival, challenging American leadership in the high ground of space."
China has said it planned to land its astronauts on the moon by 2030, while NASA's Artemis return-to-the-moon program is aiming to return American astronauts to the surface in 2028.
"The difference between success and failure will be measured in months, not years," Mr. Isaacman said. "They may be early, and recent history suggests we might be late."

The updated lunar plans come about a week before NASA hopes to launch astronauts around the moon and back for the first time since the end of its Apollo program in 1972. It is the second mission in Artemis, which started during the first Trump administration.
Last month, Mr. Isaacman announced an overhaul of the Artemis program. Instead of attempting a landing on the moon during Artemis III in 2028, that mission will now remain in orbit around Earth. It will also launch a year earlier. The mission will be devoted to astronauts practicing docking Orion, a capsule in which astronauts will travel to the moon's orbit, with one or both lunar landers that are being developed by SpaceX and Blue Origin.
If Artemis III goes well, that could set up two moon landing attempts in 2028 during Artemis IV and V.
Lori Glaze, the acting associate administrator of NASA's exploration systems development mission directorate, said the pieces of the vehicles being used for Artemis III and Artemis IV were already coming together and could be ready to meet the accelerated schedule. She said NASA was also working with the companies to simplify the missions to avoid further delays.
On Tuesday, Mr. Isaacman said that the pace of Artemis missions would speed up, from one every few years to twice a year after Artemis V. NASA put out a call for proposals by commercial companies to supplant the giant NASA-run Space Launch System rocket and the Orion capsule.
NASA is aiming to hire at least two companies for that task.
Plans for a moon base would proceed in three phases, Mr. Isaacman said. The first would seek to replace one-off bespoke missions with a "templated approach that will generate significant learning through experimentation," he said.
That will include small robotic landers, the delivery of vehicles that can drive astronauts along the surface and the development of other systems like communications and scientific instruments.
The second phase will consist of "semi-habitable infrastructure" that will allow regular visits of astronauts on the lunar surface. The third phase would begin the construction of permanent infrastructure that would allow a continuing human presence there.
"The moon base will not appear overnight," Mr. Isaacman said. To cover the first two phases, he said, "we will invest approximately $20 billion over the next seven years and build it through dozens of missions."
Carlos Garcia-Galan, the program executive for the moon base, said the third phase would cost an additional $10 billion.
"At this point, we're talking about 150,000 kilograms of payload on the surface," he said during his presentation. That would include habitats, vehicles to carry astronauts and cargo across the surface, power and communication systems, and potentially nuclear power plants.
Work on Gateway, a small space station that had been planned to orbit the moon, has been suspended.
Mr. Garcia-Galan, who had been the deputy manager of Gateway, said much of the money and expertise that had been devoted to Gateway would be redirected to the moon base. In an interview, he said he had been working on the moon base concept for three and a half weeks.

A part of the Gateway station that is almost complete will still go to space, but headed to a much farther destination. The station's power and propulsion element will serve as the engine of the Space Reactor-1 Freedom, or SR-1 Freedom, a robotic spacecraft headed to Mars that will be powered by a nuclear fission reactor.
The Gateway element was designed to use solar panels to power the acceleration of xenon ions to provide thrust. For SR-1 Freedom, the source of electricity changes from solar energy to a reactor mounted at the front of the spacecraft. During this mission, the reactor is too small to speed the trip, but will demonstrate the basic technology for larger systems in the future.
"We are not trying to do everything," said Steve Sinacore, the program executive for NASA's fission surface power program. "We are trying to do the hard thing."
SR-1 Freedom would demonstrate what could eventually be a faster way to get to Mars. Once it reaches the red planet, it will drop off a payload of three robotic helicopters similar to Ingenuity, which accompanied the Perseverance rover in 2021.
The helicopters will carry cameras and radar that will aim to find frozen water at a possible future landing site for astronauts.

To hear Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez of Spain tell it, Spaniards enjoy an enviable degree of immunity from the high oil and gas prices caused by the war in Iran.
As other world leaders panic over rising fuel costs, Mr. Sánchez says Spain is less at risk because it has shifted so quickly to renewable energy like solar, wind and hydroelectric power.
"Spain can demonstrate examples of how investing in renewable energy helps our households experience a lower impact from gas price increases," Mr. Sánchez said in Brussels on Thursday.
Last Saturday, for example, electricity in Spain cost roughly one-seventh what it did in France and Germany, Mr. Sánchez said.
Mr. Sánchez has a lot to point to. Spain's grid operator attributes 57 percent of the country's electricity to renewable sources, about 10 percent more than what the European Union says is the bloc's average.
Vast fields of solar panels capture all that Spanish sunshine. Wind turbines dot the sprawling Spanish landscape. Hydroelectric plants capture the power of Spanish rivers. This year's good weather has allowed Spain to increasingly turn to renewables.
That, and the 20 percent of energy Spain gets from nuclear power, has often allowed it to keep its electricity prices lower than places that are more dependent on natural gas, like Britain and Italy.
But that's only half the story.
Even in Spain the sun does not perpetually shine. Sometimes, the wind dies down. Droughts happen. During colder times of the year, renewables are insufficient for the electric grid. So nuclear and gas plants need to be kept operating to keep the lights on.
And this is where things get tricky. In the wholesale energy market, prices are set by the cost of the last energy source that is introduced to the electric grid. Since Spain turns last to gas plants, it's the gas companies that often set the higher price, driving costs up across the board.
That is actually good news for solar, wind, hydro and nuclear providers. They get a windfall from the higher prices.
Consumers get higher electric bills and households often end up paying as much as many of their European neighbors.
So what's the whole story?
Mr. Sánchez is right that, last Saturday, Spain's electricity cost much less than in France and Germany. But that's not always the case.
 "He's cherry picking," said Pedro Linares, professor of industrial engineering at Comillas Pontifical University in Madrid.
Professor Linares said that Spain was enjoying a stretch of good spring weather with full reservoirs for hydropower after a rainy season. Once summer starts, the reservoirs will provide less power, forcing Spain to rely more on gas.
Spanish electricity bills are also inflated by taxes and charges that are levied to keep the electric grid running and safe, the professor said.
And even though Spain's electric grid is driven mostly by renewables, its homes are still heated and its cars still fueled by oil and gas.
"We are still very much reliant on fossil fuels," said Professor Linares. "And so very much affected by the cost of oil and natural gas."
Spain's energy mix can be complicated.
Last April, Spain suffered a blackout that kept much of the country in the dark for up to 10 hours.
The causes were complex. But what seemed clear was that Spain - at least for now - still needs at least some gas and nuclear power in its system to avoid possible imbalances from renewable energy.

South Korea started a nationwide energy-saving campaign on Tuesday, urging people to take shorter showers, ride bicycles for short trips and avoid charging phones and electric vehicles at night.
Like other nations, South Korea has become increasingly concerned about disruptions to oil and gas supplies because of the U.S.-Israeli war on Iran. The country imports all of its oil and gas. Nearly 70 percent of its crude oil supply passed through the Strait of Hormuz, which borders Iran, until the war brought that tanker traffic to a near standstill.
Rising oil prices and South Korea's weakening won against the dollar are dealing a double blow to its economy, which depends heavily on its energy-intensive manufacturing industries.
Presiding over a cabinet meeting on Tuesday, President Lee Jae Myung appealed to the public to join a national 12-step drive to save energy. He invoked the patriotism South Koreans showed during the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, when families sold necklaces and other gold jewelry to help raise badly needed hard currency, and during the pandemic, when people faithfully followed government-imposed social distancing and Covid testing rules.
"We desperately need the cooperation from the people," he said. "We can surely overcome this crisis if we put our minds together."
The Ministry of Climate, Energy and Environment encouraged people to use washing machines and vacuum cleaners only on weekends, to switch to energy-efficient home appliances and lighting, and to use public transportation as much as possible. Such steps were voluntary.
For its part, the government said it would require all agencies to operate their vehicles only four out of five workdays. (For instance, government cars with license plate numbers that end with a 1 or 6 will be taken off the road on Mondays.)
It asked the public to do the same, adding that restrictions on private vehicles could become mandatory should the energy crisis worsen.
The government also said it would accelerate work on five of the 10 nuclear power plants currently under maintenance so they could restart them earlier. (It has 16 others operating now.)
Businesses were also asked to come up with conservation measures, such as turning office lights off during lunch breaks and encouraging workers to use the stairs instead of elevators.
The government placed price caps on gasoline, diesel and heating kerosene on March 13 - the first time in 30 years. It also promised to create a supplementary budget worth $16.5 billion to ease the impact of exchange rate fluctuations and high oil prices, particularly on low-income households.
It also planned to distribute cash vouchers to all households to stimulate the local economy.

For decades, geothermal energy has been a niche source of electricity available in a few areas like California and Iceland.
But a new wave of start-ups is aiming to expand geothermal into a workhorse of the global energy system. They are adopting advanced drilling techniques from the oil and gas industry to harvest the heat beneath the earth to generate power in many more places.
Fervo Energy, the most prominent of these start-ups, is tapping into a wave of investor enthusiasm about the technology, which offers the promise of clean, abundant electricity that is available around the clock.
This week, Fervo raised $1.89 billion in its initial public offering, more than what investors had expected even after a surge of interest from Wall Street. The company, whose stock now trades on Nasdaq, sold 70 million shares at $27 each, giving it an initial valuation of roughly $7.7 billion.
Trading in Fervo's stock started on Wednesday at $36, or 33 percent more than the offering price, and closed at $36.54.
"It's a real signal of confidence to the industry," said Kate Adie, a research analyst at Wood MacKenzie, an energy research firm. "It's signaling to investors that this is something that there's confidence in, and it can work, and it can be repeatable, and it can be scalable."
Fervo, which is based in Houston, is building its first commercial geothermal power plant in Utah and planning others across the West. The company is betting that rising electricity demand in the United States, driven in part by the rapid growth of data centers, will propel geothermal.
"The exciting thing for us is this has now infused us with the capital needed to actually grow at the pace we've always wanted to, to grow in terms of putting gigawatts on the grid and solving this energy challenge," Tim Latimer, chief executive of Fervo Energy, said in an interview with The New York Times.
Across the country, technology companies and utilities are hunting for energy to fuel the artificial intelligence boom. They are pouring tens of billions of dollars into solar energy, batteries and power plants that use natural gas. They are also investing in new kinds of nuclear power plants.
Geothermal has support across the political spectrum because it can produce electricity without any planet-warming emissions while operating 24 hours a day, unlike wind and solar projects. The Trump administration has also backed the technology, recently announcing $171 million for field tests.
"We're at the very beginning of this potential revolution that I think we're entering into in a big way," Kyle Haustveit, a former petroleum engineer and now an assistant energy secretary, said about geothermal at a March conference. He compared it to the early days of the shale revolution that unlocked enormous amounts of natural gas.
Traditionally, geothermal plants have been in places with underground hot water reservoirs close to the earth's surface. Only a few locations are blessed with such geology, including parts of California and Nevada in the United States. As a result, geothermal provides just 0.4 percent of electricity in the country.
Yet dig deep enough anywhere and you will find lots of heat, which dozens of start-ups are hoping to tap.
Mr. Latimer said that until recently many people did not have confidence that companies like his could successfully expand geothermal energy's footprint.
 "There was such deep skepticism from investors that it was hard not only for Fervo but the entire geothermal ecosystem to actually capitalize the business," said Mr. Latimer, who previously worked in the oil and gas industry. "I think people are waking up to this opportunity and seeing that we're going to need all kinds of new technologies to close the gap of how much power we need."
Fervo drills pairs of wells that extend thousands of feet down into hot, dry granite. Then, using controlled explosives and high-pressure fluids, it creates cracks between the wells. Finally, Fervo injects water into one well so that it moves through those cracks, heats up to more than 300 degrees Fahrenheit and comes out the other well as steam that turns turbines to generate electricity.
Founded in 2017, the company expects its Utah power plant, called Cape Station, to start sending power to the grid this year. It will ultimately have the capacity to generate at least 500 megawatts of electricity - power that Fervo has agreed to sell to Google, Southern California Edison and others.
The theoretical potential is enormous. The United States has about 3,800 megawatts of conventional geothermal capacity, mostly in the West. Fervo has leased lands with the potential for more than 40,000 megawatts of capacity, the company said.
Yet enhanced geothermal power faces major barriers.
Geothermal companies need to significantly lower costs of drilling and setting up their plants. In its filing, Fervo said Cape Station would cost approximately $7,000 for each kilowatt of electricity it produced. That would make it cheaper than new nuclear plants but still more than twice as expensive as natural gas plants.
Geothermal executives say those prices will fall quickly, as the industry becomes more efficient at drilling and optimizing wells, similarly to the way oil and gas companies have. That, analysts said, could lower geothermal costs to roughly the same level as natural gas plants in parts of the West over five to 10 years.
One big concern, however, is how quickly geothermal wells might cool off as water is pumped through them. If they cool off after just a few years, companies will need to drill new wells, raising costs.
"I think one of the biggest question marks that the big capital providers are still waiting to see is the decline," Mr. Haustveit said. "We need to get real field data."
Some critics also worry that drilling for geothermal energy could increase the risk of seismic activity or contaminate local groundwater.
"No energy source is completely devoid of environmental or public health risk," said Jeff Deyette, deputy director for clean energy at the Union of Concerned Scientists. He added that it was "very much a good thing to see a company like Fervo and its piloting of next-generation geothermal technologies be successful."
In its I.P.O. filing, Fervo lists other potential risks, including the possibility that data centers might not use nearly as much energy as expected or that its customers will gravitate to other technologies like nuclear reactors. Fervo has yet to turn a profit.
Today, most U.S. geothermal power plants are owned by companies that also produce power in other ways.
Ormat Technologies, based in Reno, Nev., is the leading developer and operator of geothermal power plants. Investors value it at $7.5 billion, slightly less than Fervo's initial valuation, though Ormat also has waste heat and energy storage projects.
While Fervo is pretty far along, other geothermal start-ups are hoping to follow quickly.
Sage Geosystems, also based in Houston, is pursuing a technique to inject water into hydraulically fractured wells and use heat and pressure to store and generate electricity. Eavor Technologies, based in Calgary, Alberta, is building what is essentially a large underground radiator to provide heat and power to a town in Germany.
Another company, Controlled Thermal Resources, is planning an initial public offering in the fall. It is developing a geothermal energy plant at the Salton Sea in California. The company plans to locate data centers at the site and extract critical minerals from a brine that is a byproduct of its process.
"There's a lot of innovation in this space, and very few companies are trying the exact same thing," said Ann Garth, a geothermal researcher at the Clean Air Task Force, an environmental group. "We're still in the early stages, so it's good to see so many people trying different things."

Several years ago, in a burst of climate optimism, Democratic-led states across the Northeast adopted some of the world's most ambitious policies to shift away from fossil fuels and cut planet-warming emissions.
But today, many of those states are scaling back or rethinking their climate plans as they miss emissions targets, struggle with soaring electricity bills and confront the Trump administration's hostility to renewable energy.
In New York, Gov. Kathy Hochul recently said the state's goal for deeply cutting emissions by 2030 was now "unattainable" and asked the legislature to rework its landmark climate law. Regulators had been discussing fees on polluters to help meet that goal, but Ms. Hochul said the costs passed onto consumers would be too high.
In Massachusetts, lawmakers are eyeing cuts to a program that adds charges to utility bills to fund heat pumps and efficiency upgrades, while Gov. Maura Healey has pursued a flurry of energy policy changes to address affordability.
In Rhode Island, Gov. Dan McKee has proposed delaying a legal deadline for the state to get all of its electricity from renewables, from 2033 to 2050, claiming that the current mandate would impose steep near-term costs.
"The biggest hardship I hear from Rhode Islanders right now is their growing energy bills," Mr. McKee said after proposing to reduce state charges on utility bills that would have funded solar panels and other climate programs, in a move he estimated would save residents $1 billion over five years. "We need to provide relief now."
Most Northeastern governors still say tackling global warming is a priority. And climate advocates have fought against rollbacks, arguing that cutting clean energy and efficiency programs might ease burdens on taxpayers today, but will cost more in the long run by leaving the region exposed to volatile oil and gas prices.
But the ambitious targets look increasingly out of reach. Various states had aimed to reduce emissions roughly in half by 2030 and nearly zero them out by midcentury. Yet New York's emissions have barely budged since 2021, while carbon dioxide from New England's power plants has increased the past two years.
Many Democrats blame President Trump. Northeastern states had planned to build giant wind farms in the Atlantic Ocean to produce clean power, but that has become exceedingly difficult with the White House's attacks on offshore wind. Federal tax breaks for solar panels and electric cars have been eliminated.
Mr. Trump's antagonism to renewable energy isn't the only factor, though. The Northeast has for years had some of the nation's highest electricity rates, partly driven by local policies. Some Democratic governors, worried about looming electricity shortages, now want to reconsider longstanding taboos against expanding nuclear power or natural gas pipelines.
It's a sign of how the political landscape has shifted in the Trump era, as Democrats try to balance fears of a warming planet with immediate concerns about the cost of living.
"I think, generally speaking, if it's affordable, New England governors are now willing to consider it," said Gov. Ned Lamont, Democrat of Connecticut.
A struggle to meet clean energy goals
In 2019, New York passed a sweeping law requiring the state to cut emissions 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030 and to essentially stop emitting greenhouse gases by 2050. Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Vermont adopted similar goals.
At the time, business groups and critics called the targets unrealistic and expensive. But supporters said that while the Northeast would need big upfront investments in clean energy, the region would ultimately benefit from weaning itself off fossil fuels.
"The argument at the time was that these targets were achievable with the right mix of technological progress and federal support," said Noah Kaufman, a senior research scholar at Columbia University's Center on Global Energy Policy.
"But," he added, "a lot has happened between then and now."

To meet their goals, Northeastern states planned to build more than a dozen wind farms in the ocean, since there is less room onshore for renewables. That meant creating an entire offshore wind industry from scratch. But the coronavirus pandemic wrecked supply chains and interest rates rose, which delayed projects and caused costs to skyrocket.
Then Mr. Trump returned to office and sought to block offshore wind, a technology he detests. While four offshore wind projects are still under construction, it is unclear if more can be built. New York's climate plan calls for 9,000 megawatts of offshore wind by 2035, enough to power 6 million homes. Currently, only 1,800 megawatts are set to come online.
"That was a huge setback," said Kyle Murray, the director of state program implementation at Acadia Center, a clean energy advocacy group. "Offshore wind was the primary strategy that states like Massachusetts were going to pursue for its electricity future, and now it's shut down."
Yet Mr. Trump wasn't the only obstacle. Local hurdles also stymied projects.
In Maine, landowners fought a proposed transmission line to shuttle onshore wind power to the rest of New England. In western Massachusetts, residents have opposed large solar farms. In New York, 97 communities have enacted moratoriums on battery storage, often over fire concerns.
Massachusetts, New York and Vermont have also recently shut down nuclear plants after opposition from antinuclear activists. Those closures, including of Indian Point outside New York City, removed a large chunk of carbon-free power.
The slow build-out of clean energy means the Northeast still relies primarily on natural gas for power and heat - which is relatively expensive, since there are limited pipelines to bring in cheap gas from places like Pennsylvania. Over the past decade, Democrats and environmentalists have blocked several proposed pipelines.
Today, residential electricity rates in the Northeast are twice as high as those in the Midwest or South and climbing fast. High natural gas prices, weather disasters and rising transmission costs are major factors, but clean energy mandates also add costs, a study from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory found.
In New York, a state analysis found its climate law added $10 to $12 per month to residential electric bills in 2024, a figure expected to rise over time. While those costs don't capture the law's benefits, such as cleaner air, they have made politicians squeamish at a time of high inflation.
Expensive power can also make it harder to persuade people to switch to electric cars or heat pumps, two key climate strategies.
At the same time, some policymakers say that renewable energy isn't enough to meet the region's needs. During a ferocious storm this winter, New England produced little electricity from wind or solar at times and couldn't import enough gas to cover demand. So power plants had to burn oil, a much dirtier fuel, instead. Meanwhile, a transmission line to bring hydropower from Quebec finally came online after years of delay - except Quebec had little power to spare, either.
The Trump administration piled on, citing the storm and the Northeast's high prices as evidence of the follies of climate policy.
"The timing could not have been more cinematic," said Dan Dolan, executive director of the New England Power Generators Association, a trade group. "It really encapsulated the consequences of where we sit."
A pivot to 'affordability'
Many Democratic governors are looking to revamp their climate plans.
In New York, Ms. Hochul said that because of offshore wind delays and other setbacks, meeting the state's 2030 goals for reducing emissions would now require such drastic cuts and steep fees on industries that it could cost the typical household thousands of dollars per year. She has asked legislators to instead require more gradual emissions cuts over the next decade.
"Help us change the climate law," she said last month. "We're not saying no to it. We're just saying give us a longer runway."
In Rhode Island, Mr. McKee has proposed postponing deadlines to switch entirely to renewable energy, saying that the Trump administration's actions have made existing targets "challenging." In Massachusetts, Ms. Healey has delayed a state clean heat standard aimed at transitioning homes away from fossil-fuel heating, citing concerns about costs. A similar standard in Vermont died amid industry backlash.
Environmentalists have opposed many of these changes, arguing that expensive natural gas is the biggest reason for high energy prices in the region, and the quicker utilities can get off gas, the better. That means doubling down on efficiency and conservation measures, solar power and batteries while investing less in extending gas pipelines to new homes, they say.
"We could cut all these clean energy programs now and save a little on bills, but we're still going to be in a constant cycle of natural gas costs going up unless we figure out how to break the cycle," said Mr. Murray of Acadia Center.
Massachusetts Gov. Maura Healey, who has delayed a state "clean heat standard" aimed at transitioning homes away from fossil-fuel heating, citing its costs.Credit...Kylie Cooper for The New York Times
Because New England still relies heavily on heating oil for homes, the region has been hit hard by price spikes stemming from the Iran conflict.
Some governors, desperate to rein in costs, are exploring new ways to speed up clean energy deployment while lowering bills. Ms. Healey in Massachusetts has moved to streamline permitting for solar projects, reduce electricity rates for heat pump owners and make the grid more flexible to reduce the need to build additional power plants.
"We can bring more energy in to lower people's bills and bring more clean energy in to reduce emissions all at the same time," Ms. Healey said.
More contentiously, Ms. Hochul, Mr. Lamont and Ms. Healey have also expressed openness to new natural gas pipelines, which studies suggest could save the region money on gas costs - though they could also slow the shift to low-carbon energy. A few smaller pipeline expansions have begun moving forward.
All six New England governors also recently voiced support for expanding nuclear power - a stark turnaround for a region with a history of opposing the technology. Ms. Healey has asked Massachusetts legislators to lift a 1980s-era moratorium on new nuclear plants, an energy source supported by the Trump administration.
"We need to make sure we're getting all types of energy supply into the region to meet our growing needs," said Ms. Healey. "We can't just put our eggs in one basket."
New York and New England together make up less than 1 percent of global carbon dioxide emissions, so they have only a small direct influence over rising temperatures. But as blue states hope to fill the gap after the federal government's retreat on climate, many hope the Northeast can show that boosting clean energy can be popular and beneficial.
"We've spent years building up climate laws and economic development models around clean energy," J. Timmons Roberts, an environmental studies professor at Brown, said of Rhode Island's proposed rollbacks. "Are we really just going to give that up in a moment of panic?"

The war in Iran has sent fuel prices soaring in Europe, which is now confronting its second energy crisis in less than five years. But even as some countries have installed record levels of wind and solar power as a way of insulating themselves against energy shocks, the results have been uneven.
Germany, for example, has created more wind and solar capacity than Spain, but that has not stopped Germany's wholesale electricity prices from jumping sharply at times, while Spain's have been relatively stable.
So what explains these differences?
One big factor is the structure of Europe's energy markets. Because of the way Europe sets wholesale electricity prices, even a small amount of fossil fuel in a country's energy mix can have an outsize effect, anchoring prices higher and canceling out potential savings from renewables.
Electricity prices have long been set using similar systems, including in the U.S. But some experts say these pricing systems, particularly in Europe, need to be adjusted to accommodate the growth of renewable energy.
Why Investing in Wind and Solar to Avoid Gas Shocks Hasn't Added Up for Some - The New York Times
First, some background: After Russia cut off natural gas supplies to the European Union in 2022, manufacturers had to partially shut down factories and some households saw heating bills rise tenfold. Policymakers responded by embracing energy produced at home. They committed to investing heavily in wind and solar, with a target of generating more than 40 percent renewable energy by 2030.
How Europe's energy pricing works
Europe's energy markets work like a cup that needs to be filled every hour. The cup represents all of a country's energy demand. First, the cheapest form of energy is poured into the cup, then the next most expensive, and so forth. That generally means solar and wind are added to the mix first, then hydroelectric and nuclear power, then gas and coal.
But here's the catch: European countries' wholesale electricity prices are determined by the last, most expensive form of fuel that's added to the mix. In practice, that means using a relatively small amount of fossil fuel energy, like gas, can raise a country's wholesale electricity prices, regardless of how much cheaper renewables it uses.
"It's not just about how much gas a country uses in its power supply," said Chris Rosslowe, senior energy analyst at Ember, a research firm. "It's about how influential that gas technology is on power prices."
Expensive natural gas can push up energy prices
Wholesale electricity prices are determined by the most expensive energy source in the mix at any given time - and fossil fuels are often the costliest.

(Wholesale prices are what suppliers pay for electricity. They often have a big effect on retail prices, which can also be complicated by transmission costs and other factors.
The renewable energy threshold
To fully protect electricity markets from fossil fuel price shocks, European Union countries would need to fill virtually all of their demand with sources that are less expensive to operate like wind, solar, hydroelectric and nuclear.
That's not to say renewable energy in Europe is an all-or-nothing proposition: Electricity from every solar panel that is added to the grid helps avoid some of the greenhouse gas emissions that worsen climate change.
"Any crisis in fossil fuel markets has a direct impact on Europe," said Frauke Thies, Europe director at Agora Energiewende, a research organization based in Berlin. "Countries that have invested more in renewables are, broadly speaking, better off."
Spain's solar push
These pricing dynamics help explain why Spain's renewables have been so transformative. In 2021, gas prices determined Spanish wholesale electricity prices 52 percent of the time. By 2025, the country had installed so much renewable energy that the number had fallen to 26 percent.
In the first half of 2025, Spain's wholesale electricity price was about two thirds of the E.U. average, according to data from Ember. Spain now gets more than 40 percent of its electricity from wind and sun, though its grid did suffer a blackout last year that an investigation later found had been caused by multiple factors.
"Spain is emerging as a good student," of the Russia-Ukraine energy crisis, said Phuc-Vinh Nguyen, head of energy center at Institut Jacques Delors, a research group based in France.
In Germany, by contrast, gas prices in 2025 set electricity prices slightly more often than they did in 2021, about 35 percent of the time, even though the country has installed more renewable capacity than Spain. This is happening in part because Germany shut down its nuclear power plants and has decommissioned some coal plants, increasing its reliance on natural gas. Italy, which gets most of its electricity from fossil fuels, has seen high wholesale prices in recent weeks, too.Efforts are underway to reduce the influence of oil and gas on European energy prices. Countries are in the process of better connecting their power systems to make it easier to spread excess energy capacity around. (Back to the analogy: Imagine Spain's cup overflowing with renewable energy, but better able to pour the extra into France's cup.) Another change, which is in progress, involves updating the way renewable energy is paid for to stabilize prices.
Better interconnection and system optimization could save nearly $600 billion between 2035 and 2050, according to an analysis by Agora Energiewende.

The Energy Department said on Thursday that it was in the process of revising or canceling more than $83 billion in loans for clean energy technologies that had been approved under the Biden administration.
The announcement came from the agency's loan programs office, which played a central role in the Biden administration's efforts to develop new technologies to fight climate change. Under President Joseph R. Biden Jr., that office finalized or issued conditional commitments for roughly $104 billion in lending for battery factories, transmission lines, hydrogen plants and many other projects.
The Trump administration has sought to reshape the agency and renamed it the Office of Energy Dominance Financing. Last year, the energy secretary, Chris Wright, announced a sweeping review of the office's loan obligations.
Since then, the agency said, more than $29.9 billion of those Biden-era loans have either been canceled or are in the process of being scrapped. Loans and loan guarantees worth another $53.6 billion appear to be moving forward, albeit with revisions, though the agency did not provide further details.
The Energy Department declined to provide a full list of the affected projects, but many of the loan cancellations included in the $9.9 billion figure had been previously announced, either by the agency or the borrowers themselves.
Some projects had already withered over the past year because the outlook for renewable energy and electric vehicles had dimmed considerably under President Trump, who has disparaged those technologies as a "green scam." In other cases, the Energy Department has canceled the financing directly.
Last May, for instance, the agency backed away from a partial loan guarantee worth $2.92 billion to Sunnova Energy, a residential solar panel installer that was experimenting with a novel way to link home solar and battery systems. Sunnova, which filed for bankruptcy the next month, had been running into trouble even before Mr. Trump's return to office because of high interest rates and reduced state incentives for solar.
In July, the Energy Department canceled a $4.9 billion loan guarantee for the Grain Belt Express, a planned transmission line in the Midwest that would have connected wind farms in Kansas with cities in Illinois and Indiana. The project faced opposition from Senator Josh Hawley, Republican of Missouri, who urged Mr. Wright to scrap the Biden-era loan guarantee.
In November, Plug Power, a company that aims to convert renewable electricity into hydrogen fuels, said it would suspend all work on activities related to a $1.66 billion federal loan guarantee that had been finalized during the Biden administration. The prospects for so-called green hydrogen have faded lately, particularly after Mr. Trump's domestic policy bill cut tax incentives for the technology.
Other previously announced cancellations include loans or loan guarantees for KORE Power, a battery manufacturer; Redwood Materials, a battery recycling firm; and Aspen Aerogels, a company making novel insulation materials for electric vehicle batteries.
It is unclear whether any of the companies that had their financing withdrawn might try to appeal the termination of their loans. This month, a federal judge ruled that the Energy Department had illegally canceled seven energy grants that had been issued through other programs during the Biden administration.
At the same time, the Trump administration has sought to provide loans and financing for technologies it favors, like natural gas and nuclear power.
Mr. Wright has said he wants to use much of the agency's remaining loan authority - estimated at more than $289 billion - to bankroll new nuclear plants as well as to support technologies like geothermal energy and mining for critical minerals.
The Energy Department under Mr. Wright preserved a $1.5 billion loan guarantee that the Biden administration had finalized to help Holtec International restart a shuttered nuclear plant in Michigan. The agency also finalized a separate $1 billion loan guarantee to help Constellation restart a closed reactor at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania.
Other Biden-era loans have been modified or cast in a new light to reflect the Trump administration's priorities.
The Biden administration had issued a conditional commitment for a $1.5 billion loan guarantee to Wabash Valley Resources, which was planning to produce low-carbon fertilizer in Indiana by burying the emissions from its factory 7,000 feet underground. The Trump administration ended up finalizing the loan but sought to emphasize the project's use of coal rather than its emissions benefits.
The Trump administration also restructured a loan to Lithium Americas, which is trying to produce lithium carbonate for batteries in Thacker Pass, Nev., so that the federal government was able to take an equity stake in the project.
In some cases, Republican lawmakers have lobbied for projects in their districts.
In Great Falls, Mont., a company called Montana Renewables had secured a $1.67 billion loan guarantee from the Biden administration to expand a plant that converted vegetable oils and fats into diesel and jet fuel. Initially, the Trump administration paused the first scheduled payment. But last February, Senator Steve Daines, Republican of Montana, said that he had prevailed on the White House to unblock the funds.
The Energy Department's loan office was created in 2005 to help emerging energy technologies, which often have trouble getting conventional financing, become commercially viable. It gained notoriety after it lent $535 million in 2009 to Solyndra, a solar firm that went bankrupt two years later. But it also gave a crucial $465 million loan in 2010 to Tesla, which grew into an electric vehicle powerhouse.
Mr. Wright has claimed that many of the Biden administration's loan approvals were rushed, pointing out that the majority of deals were either finalized or received conditional commitments after Mr. Trump won the 2024 election.
Former agency officials, however, have said that projects go through exhaustive vetting. And some said that attempts to go after loan agreements could deter companies from doing business with the federal government in the future.
"If we get to conditional commitment with a loan program recipient, that's the government's credibility," David Turk, the deputy secretary of energy during the Biden administration, said last year. "That's the American people's credibility on the line to follow through and make sure that we are providing that certainty for investment."

The framework deal between the United States and Iran sets the stage for an end to the bursts of violence and debilitating disruption of energy deliveries and trade in the Persian Gulf. But don't expect economies around the globe to simply pick up where they left off before the United States and Israel began bombing Iran on Feb. 28.
The war has set in motion changes that will be hard to reverse.
The global energy order is being reshaped.
The near shutdown in oil and gas deliveries from the Middle East and the leap in prices are causing a shift in power. Energy producers from the Gulf to the Americas are jockeying to maintain or increase their dominance, and customers are struggling to reduce their dependency and shore up their supply.
As a result, the energy market is changing, the energy mix is changing and the energy players are changing.
The profound vulnerability of countries throughout Asia, Europe and elsewhere that depend on imported energy is supercharging the hunt for alternatives. In some places, like South Korea and Japan, that has led to an increased use of dirtier fuels like coal.
But over the longer term, this energy shock - the second in just four years - is likely to accelerate a transition to renewables like solar and wind as well as nuclear power.
Improvements in electric battery technology and efficiency make the shift more feasible than it was when Russia's invasion of Ukraine prompted a global energy shock in 2022, said Daan Walter at Ember, an energy research group in London.
In many places, for instance, electric vehicles are increasingly affordable. And in April, wind and solar generated more electricity globally than gas for the first time.
"This is a big turnaround," Mr. Walter said. "So what was five years ago maybe barely competitive, now is almost already clearly cheaper."
Investments in renewables have also become a better bet, promising returns in closer to two years instead of 30, he said.
Relations among producers are also changing. The war heightened tensions between the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia and prompted the Emirates to leave the OPEC Plus oil cartel. The impact of that departure will be fully felt only when oil production in the region picks up. But a weakened Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries could add to volatility in oil markets.
The split has also encouraged the Saudis to move closer to Russia. Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, featured Saudi Arabia this month as the "guest of honor" at an economic forum in St. Petersburg.
Russia, the second-largest producer of crude oil and gas after the United States, has been strengthened in other ways by the war. The Trump administration temporarily lifted sanctions imposed on Russia, allowing Moscow to pump up profits from its oil exports when its economy is ailing.

On the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, Brazil, Venezuela, Colombia, Argentina and Guyana are building their oil production capacity as the world looks for alternative suppliers.
China is a major beneficiary.
The push to build out and diversify energy networks is going to continue long after the war ends. And China is poised to benefit most from the expected boon in renewables.
It is leagues ahead of the rest of the world in producing wind turbines, high-voltage cables, transformers, solar panels, batteries, software to manage energy flows and more.
China's increasing role ensuring that other countries have a dependable supply of energy amplifies its strategic influence and importance.
"China looks to be an out-and-out winner," analysts from Wood Mackenzie, a global energy consulting firm, concluded.
The Trump administration's aggressive push to halt renewable energy projects - even paying companies to cancel wind farms - means the United States is essentially withdrawing from this global competition and ceding the industrial and technological advantage to its biggest rival.
The economic advantages are reinforced by geopolitical ones. The war has deepened the wedge between the United States and longtime allies in Europe, providing another opening for China to enlarge its role as an international leader.
Re-establishing trust will be difficult.
It is unclear whether shipping traffic will ever again be able to move freely through the Strait of Hormuz - the only sea route for moving oil, natural gas and other cargo out of the Persian Gulf.
Iran has pushed to impose fees on ships that pass through the narrow waterway, even though such a plan could violate international agreements. Even if new payments are not codified, Iran has shown it can disrupt trade any time it wants, which raises risks and costs.
"I think the strait is never going to go back to the certainty of free passage that we've been used to," said Maurice Obstfeld, a former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund.
Similarly, the trust in the region's peace, stability and growing prosperity has also been shaken.
"The dynamism of the Gulf economies may be impaired by the vulnerability they showed," Mr. Obstfeld said, and that "raises Iran's leverage in the region."
For the Emirates, which has billed itself as a global financial hub, trade center and tourist attraction, attacks on its five-star hotels, data complexes and a nuclear facility could scare off visitors and investors.
As for the United States, Mr. Trump's decision to provoke a war with Iran, combined with his chaotic policymaking, has further undermined confidence in Washington's willingness and ability to maintain global order and commerce.
"The capacity of the U.S. as a military force has been once again shown to be limited," Mr. Obstfeld said. And Iran's continued resistance "is a huge blow to global faith in the U.S. as a provider of security."
For decades, a primary mission of the U.S. Navy has been to guarantee freedom of navigation on the seas, said Mark Blyth, a political scientist at Brown University. Iran's success in continuing to block ship traffic, though, has demonstrated that for all its might, the United States cannot ensure the seas will be open and free.
The economy has been kicked onto a path of slower growth and higher prices.
When economists at the World Bank began sifting through data early this year, they were pleasantly surprised. "We were starting to think about upgrading our forecasts, between January and February, because things were looking so good," said Indermit Gill, the bank's chief economist. "Inflation was coming down, growth was picking up, trade had kind of taken it on the chin and was still standing."
No more. The bank just revised its economic outlook, lowering its forecast. It now expects global growth to decline to 2.5 percent this year from 2.9 percent in 2025.
Inflation is also starting to roar. In the United States, it rose for the third month in row, hitting an annual rate of 4.2 percent in May. And instead of planning for the next drop in interest rates, Wall Street is expecting the Federal Reserve to increase rates at least once this year. Last week, the European Central Bank raised rates to 2.25 percent. "The war in the Middle East is generating inflation pressures," the bank said.
Higher rates have serious longer-term effects on both rich and poor countries that have already run up staggering public debts and are using a growing portion of revenue just to pay interest costs.
Those budgetary pressures are only going to increase as governments offer assistance to households struggling with higher energy prices and increase military budgets to cope with growing security threats.
Asian economies, slapped hardest by the crisis, have already inundated the Asian Development Bank for emergency loans as they seek to rescue their economies and finances from the impact of the Iran war.
"The world economy is going to end up being more jittery," Mr. Gill said. And that is not good for long-term planning, investment or growth.

NextEra Energy, one of the largest power companies in the United States, on Monday announced plans to acquire Dominion Energy, in an all-stock deal that could transform the power industry as it races to supply electricity needed to fuel the booming growth of artificial intelligence.
Technology giants are vigorously building data centers to provide the computing power for artificial intelligence. Peak electricity demand in coming summers and winters is expected to jump more than 20 percent nationwide through 2035, in part because of data centers.
NextEra, whose shares have climbed 15 percent this year, has been looking to capitalize on what its chief executive, John Ketchum, has called "America's golden age of power demand." Last year, it struck deals with Google in Iowa and Meta in New Mexico.
According to the terms of the deal, NextEra, which is based in Florida and has a market value of about $194 billion, would exchange about eight-tenths of a share of its stock for each outstanding share of Dominion, which has a market value of $54 billion. NextEra shareholders would ultimately own about 75 percent of the combined company, and Dominion shareholders would get a $360 million cash payment when the deal closed. Including debt, the deal values Dominion at more than $120 billion.
The agreement with Dominion, which would need approval from federal regulators, is the latest in a series of megadeals across different industries as executives and their advisers try to take advantage of agencies' willingness to approve business consolidations under President Trump. Some are hoping that the administration may be particularly open to mergers and acquisitions ahead of the midterm elections in November, seeing them as a signal of a strong economy.
The deal also requires local approvals, including in Virginia, whose governor, Abigail Spanberger, has pledged to lower energy bills and make data centers pay more for electricity. Dominion operates retail utilities in Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina. It serves the largest cluster of data centers in the world, known as Data Center Alley, in Virginia.
The companies said they are proposing offering $2.25 billion in bill credits to Dominion Energy's customers in Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina over two years after the deal closes. That would work out to around $562 in total for each of Dominion's roughly four million customers.
The combined company would serve roughly 10 million utility customers across Florida, Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina. Mr. Ketchum of NextEra would serve as chairman and chief executive of the new company, while Robert Blue, the chief executive of Dominion, would serve as chief executive of the company's regulated utilities and be a director on the company's board. Dominion will continue using its name in its service area.
"Electricity demand is rising faster than it has in decades," Mr. Ketchum said. "We are bringing NextEra Energy and Dominion Energy together because scale matters more than ever."
The acquisition would create a giant with more than 30,000 employees and a market value of $420 billion, including debt. It would move NextEra into the Mid-Atlantic region, the country's largest electricity market with 67 million customers in 13 states and Washington, D.C. It could also help reduce corporate and other costs, such as management of the two companies' nuclear power plants.
The deal is the latest in a series of agreements across the United States as electric utilities try to manage the pressures of rising electricity demand, aging equipment that has been battered by extreme weather and climate events, and higher utility bills that have become the focus of political campaigns.
Tapping into fervor over artificial intelligence and the need for electricity, BlackRock, the world's largest asset manager, and Blackstone, a private equity firm, announced acquisitions last year of some of the nation's utility companies.
In March, a consortium led by a subsidiary of BlackRock agreed to acquire AES, a power company that owns several utility companies in North and South America and power production plants globally.
The deal spree has become a political touch point. Concern about BlackRock's acquisitions prompted three Democratic senators to send a letter to the firm's chairman and chief executive, Larry Fink, questioning how the company planned to ensure affordable power for utility customers.
David Pomerantz, executive director of the Energy and Policy Institute, a nonprofit energy watchdog organization, contends that a NextEra-Dominion deal would hurt utility customers and give one company outsize influence in the utility business.
"If regulators approve this merger, it will lead to higher electric bills for customers in Virginia and South Carolina," said Mr. Pomerantz, whose organization has been chronicling the operations of NextEra for years. He added, "A megamonopoly of this size, with the kind of money to buy political influence that NextEra will have, will be nearly impossible to regulate."
In Monday's announcement, the companies sought to highlight the deal's benefits to consumers. In addition to bill credits, the companies said, their combined scale would allow for more efficiencies and better customer service.
"This combination brings together two strong operating platforms and creates an even stronger energy partner for Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Florida, with the scale and balance sheet to deliver the generation, transmission and grid investments our customers and economies need," Mr. Blue said. "This combination is built around our customers."
Over the course of a century, NextEra has evolved into an influential power provider that began as a regional utility in Florida. The company now runs subsidiaries that own large solar and wind power farms in the West; operates nuclear power plants in Wisconsin, New Hampshire and Florida; and owns tens of thousands of miles of power lines.
NextEra has sought for years to expand its operations by acquiring other utility companies across the country but with little success. Efforts to purchase Hawaiian Electric, the state's largest utility; Oncor, in Texas; and North Carolina's Duke Energy, one of the nation's largest retail providers, all fell through.
In 2019, NextEra bought a small Florida utility, Gulf Power, which operates largely in the state's panhandle. But after Hurricane Milton hit Florida in 2024, the former Gulf Power customers faced a storm surcharge that caused significant increases in their bills. And the war in Ukraine increased fuel costs for many NextEra retail customers.
Though those costs have eased, NextEra's Florida customers recently saw a $7 billion increase in their rates, largely affecting residential and small-business customers. The state-appointed consumer representative and a coalition of energy and justice organizations have appealed the rate increase to the Florida Supreme Court.
NextEra owns Florida Power & Light, which supplies power to about 55 percent of Florida's households and has continually sought to grow its operations by purchasing cooperative and municipal utilities. An attempt to acquire the Jacksonville Electric Authority, a municipal utility, for $11 billion ended after issues were raised about conflicts of interest within the city's operations.
As it has continued to seek to diversify its business, NextEra began pursuing other kinds of utilities outside the electricity business. In 2022, the company completed the acquisition of a water utility in Texas.
Dominion operates a diverse electricity generation fleet that includes three major nuclear plants, and has been building one of the largest offshore wind farms in the country to serve its four million customers.
The utility had ambitions of helping to expand the nation's offshore wind power farms by constructing a 472-foot-long ship, named Charybdis after a mythical sea monster, to help with installation of large turbines in the ocean.
But Mr. Trump's disdain for offshore wind power has led to cancellation of some projects and could hurt the more than $700 million Dominion has invested in the vessel.
Otherwise, Dominion has been widely seen as a stable company that expanded its own operations when it purchased the South Carolina utility SCANA in 2019, after that utility had filed bankruptcy following a failed nuclear project.

Portraying New York as a bulwark against the chaos and militancy of the Trump administration, Gov. Kathy Hochul used her State of the State address on Tuesday to convey her vision of making the state more affordable and safer for all as she entered a pivotal re-election year.
She cited "reckless federal actions" that threatened jobs and critical investments, as well as "efforts to divide, exclude and roll back hard-won rights," according to a briefing book distributed before her speech.
The governor earned some of the loudest applause of the afternoon when she took aim at federal immigration officials, invoking Renee Good, the Minneapolis mother who was shot in the face by immigration officials last week.
"Protecting New Yorkers also means this: standing up to ICE agents who abuse their power," she said, bringing the crowd to its feet.
"At its core, this agenda reflects a choice about who we want to be," Ms. Hochul said, laying out proposals that included investments in nuclear energy, lifting taxes on tips of up to $25,000 and building more protective barriers on subway platforms.
The address came at a critical time for Ms. Hochul, who must navigate shifting and complex political winds in New York. The state just saw a progressive Democrat, Zohran Mamdani, elected as mayor of New York City, but it also contains vast rural areas, where many voters support President Trump.
Ms. Hochul seemed willing to ride on Mr. Mamdani's popularity. Last week, she stood alongside the new mayor to announce that she would spend $1.7 billion in new funds to make child care available to 100,000 additional children in the coming year, for a total of $4.5 billion.

The investment, which makes New York the second state (after New Mexico) to chart a path to universal child care, will be put to use in New York City as it helps to shore up existing prekindergarten and 3-K programs and expand care to children as young as 2. The governor has also proposed bolstering funds for pre-K outside the city, as part of an effort to guarantee access for 4-year olds across the state within four years.
On Tuesday, Ms. Hochul noted the exorbitant cost of child care in the city, saying it cost close to $30,000 a year. "For that price, your toddler should be fluent in three languages and doing your taxes," she joked.
Mr. Mamdani, seated in the third row, was the first to stand and applaud as Ms. Hochul dug into the details of expanding child care over the next several years.
Other elements of her speech dovetailed with the affordability messaging that dominated last year's New York City mayoral race. But unlike Mr. Mamdani, Ms. Hochul did not point the finger at wealthy New Yorkers, or call for additional income taxes. Indeed, she said little about how she would pay for her expansive vision, preferring to leave the nuts and bolts for the state budget presentation next week.
The governor's synergy with Mr. Mamdani on affordability emanated throughout the entire address, representing a shift from Ms. Hochul's previous State of the State addresses, which typically devoted substantial time to New York's efforts to crack down on violent crime.
The atmosphere at the Egg, the iconic Albany auditorium where Ms. Hochul spoke, seemed suited to a basketball game rather than a political speech. A public address announcer gave sports-style introductions of the mayors of the state's biggest cities, saving for last Mr. Mamdani, who graciously stood and waved back at his fans.
Ms. Hochul will need the support of Mr. Mamdani's energized, progressive coalition as she seeks re-election. She is facing a primary challenge from her own lieutenant governor, Antonio Delgado, and a general election fight with the Nassau County executive, Bruce Blakeman, whose pro-abortion-rights, pro-Trump stance defies easy categorization.
Mr. Blakeman criticized the governor's address, saying Ms. Hochul had not done enough to improve affordability for New Yorkers during her first term. "She created these problems, and now she blames Washington for all the problems in New York State," he said.
Ms. Hochul has long aimed to avoid giving Republicans anything they might use to their political advantage. Her alliance is particularly delicate with Mr. Mamdani, who has already been the target of Republicans upstate and on Long Island. In her speech, Ms. Hochul attempted to portray her agenda as representing all New Yorkers, creating a bit of distance between herself and the mayor.
Mr. Delgado, who is seeking to run to the left of the governor, criticized Ms. Hochul for not offering a concrete tax plan strategy, among other things.
"It's just a bunch of status quo half measures," he said.
Aside from expanding child care, Ms. Hochul offered a series of proposals to streamline and supercharge the development of housing, reduce the cost of auto insurance and confront the pitfalls of fast-growing vices, like online gaming.
After struggling in recent years to expand the supply of housing, Ms. Hochul wants to ease stringent environmental reviews for housing and infrastructure. The rules, meant to protect air and water quality, have increasingly been used to slow or block housing, according to pro-development advocates, and hamstring the ability of local officials to tackle ambitious infrastructure projects.
Ms. Hochul has also proposed spending $3.75 billion over the next five years so communities can construct water infrastructure like sewers. The money will augment housing construction in places like Long Island, a voter-rich region, where Ms. Hochul is hoping to make inroads in November.
But the governor left little doubt about her origins, peppering her speech with references of her upbringing in Buffalo: a shared attic bedroom, an after-school job making pizza and her loyalty to the Buffalo Bills. She closed the speech by donning a Bills cap and walking off to a rally song for the team.
In a rebuke to the Trump administration, Ms. Hochul said she would support legislation to allow citizens to sue federal immigration officials who they believe have trampled on their constitutional rights. State and local law enforcement agencies are already subject to such lawsuits.
And she said she would push for legislation that would force immigration agents to obtain warrants to search "sensitive locations" such as hospitals, religious institutions and schools.
"We will not allow masked ICE agents to storm our schools, our day care centers, our hospitals, our houses of worship for civil immigration raids unless they have a judicial warrant," Ms. Hochul said.
These items are expected to be popular among Democrats in the State Legislature. This week, the leader of the State Senate said that the body considered protecting immigrants among its top priorities for the session, and that it planned to pass a bill that would bar local officials from cooperating with immigration agents.
She also hopes to make virtual spaces safer for children. Last week, Ms. Hochul announced that she wanted to extend age verification requirements across social media and online gaming platforms, which would allow the state to restrict who can contact minors online.
Ms. Hochul also introduced what she said would form the "backbone" of the state's zero-emissions energy portfolio: nuclear energy. She has directed state agencies to develop five gigawatts of nuclear energy, she said, with the goal of producing a total of 8.4 gigawatts, enough to power over one million homes.
Nuclear is attractive for policymakers because of its reliability and because it does not release carbon. But it also produces radioactive waste, can be difficult to manage and poses catastrophic risks. Protesters decrying the plan had already begun to assemble on Tuesday at the Egg auditorium.
In her address, Ms. Hochul proposed allocating $50 million to help residents seeking to make their homes more efficient. She also proposed modernizing the energy grid to make it more flexible and resilient.
But climate change - what to do about it and how to prepare for it - was mentioned just once.
As in years past, the State of the State contained a grab bag of proposals and priorities. One plan to lower the cost of auto insurance by capping payouts for drivers engaging in criminal behavior had been attacked by the powerful trial attorney lobby even before the governor started speaking.
A proposal to establish New York State as "the nation's hard cider capital" was not expected to generate similar controversy.

Before we explain a big shift in Democratic messaging on climate, and a big milestone for solar power, let's get caught up:
NOAA declares that El Niño is here and flashing danger signs: Meteorologists said Thursday that an El Niño has formed in the tropical Pacific and will likely intensify in the coming months, setting off more extreme weather and higher temperatures around the world.
El Niño is the name given to a natural phenomenon that occurs every few years when trade winds shift and the Pacific Ocean warms. And if history is any guide, a powerful El Niño could hit hard.
TWO BIG SHIFTS
A big milestone and a changing message
Despite the Trump administration's attempts to slow the growth of renewable power, the cleanest source of energy is growing, while the dirtiest source is fading.
Last month, solar power overtook coal as an electricity source in the United States for the first time, according to Ember, an energy research firm.
It's a milestone both technical and symbolic.
Solar supplied 12.8 percent of U.S. electricity in May, edging out coal, which supplied just 12.2 percent. That was the highest ever share of electricity generation for solar, and the fourth-lowest monthly share for coal.
And it happened despite the number of new solar installations falling last year in the United States in the face of attacks from the Trump administration. Last week, the Trump administration also announced a total of $700 million in federal money to reinvigorate the domestic coal industry, which has been declining for years.
This wasn't the first time that a form of renewable energy has beaten out coal. Wind has supplied more electricity than coal several times over the past five years, Ember notes. And in March, renewables including nuclear power generated more electricity than gas, the biggest source of energy for the grid, for the first time.
But the steady rise of solar reflects a sweeping global shift, with photovoltaic panels that are cheaper and more powerful than ever before.
Democrats change their tune
Yet even as solar continues its rise, Democrats are taking a more cautious approach when talking about climate change.
As Lisa Friedman and Brad Plumer write, many of the party's leaders are becoming less hostile to fossil fuels. The shift comes amid rising gas prices, higher energy bills, nagging inflation and an 18-month stretch during which the Trump administration has promoted oil, gas and coal interests.
In California, Xavier Becerra, a Democrat, emerged as the front-runner to be the state's next governor while taking campaign donations from fossil fuel companies and questioning the wisdom of California's most stringent climate goals, like ending sales of new gasoline-powered cars by 2035. In the state's nonpartisan primary, Becerra finished ahead of Tom Steyer, a billionaire investor and climate donor, who ran on a climate platform and called for breaking up utilities like PG&E.
In the Northeast, Democratic governors including Kathy Hochul of New York, Ned Lamont of Connecticut and Maura Healey of Massachusetts, have all expressed openness to new gas pipelines.
The shift has opened up a rift in the Democratic Party. While some leaders, including Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York and Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts still rail against oil and gas interests, many of their colleagues are becoming more accommodating to fossil fuel companies. And some activists are even no longer using "keep in it in the ground" as a rallying cry.
"It's something we are struggling with," said Cassidy DiPaola, a spokeswoman for Fossil Free Media, a nonprofit group, told the Times. "We are still committed as a movement to the ideas of keeping it in the ground, but as a campaign message, it's more effective to talk about building clean energy."
RENEWABLE ENERGY
The costs of delaying wind and solar
In a new study, the Corporate Energy Buyers Association, a business group that promotes emissions-free power sources, found that if no additional wind and solar energy were added to the grid, it would add $11.6 billion in annual electricity and natural gas costs to electricity bills for U.S. households.
Without those low-cost renewables coming online, electricity prices would rise sharply in the years ahead, the study found. The rate increases would be the highest for ratepayers in Texas.
Solar and wind are among the cheapest forms of energy right now. Yet barriers put up by the Trump administration, states and utilities can make it hard for consumers and businesses to access them. The federal government has come down particularly hard on the wind industry.
Beyond simply slowing the growth of renewables, the study found, these roadblocks also increase the use of natural gas and coal.
"We already see really significant delays on new large projects of all types," Rich Powell, chief executive of CEBA, said in an interview. "Our members are experiencing delays on both solar and wind."
In addition to reversing some of the recent Trump-era policies that have throttled wind and solar growth, Powell is calling for sweeping permitting reforms that would level the playing field for renewables. One specific change he'd like to see: "permit certainty." That is, making sure that a project that is approved during one presidential administration can't be undone by the political whims of the next administration.

NextEra Energy is known in its home state, Florida, as a political force whose tactics have sometimes put it at odds with regulators, residents, consumer groups and news organizations.
Now, with a proposed takeover of Dominion Energy, it wants to become the nation's largest utility and power company.
NextEra's sharp-elbowed approach in Florida has spilled into public view in lawsuits and public documents. In 2023, a group of shareholders sued the company in federal court, claiming that its political activities put their investments at risk by causing a sharp drop in its stock price.

The lawsuit said NextEra or consultants it had hired might have violated election laws, spied on journalists and engaged in dubious tactics in an effort to acquire a city-owned utility. And the lawsuit questioned whether executives at the power company had been honest about those efforts.
NextEra has said it conducted two separate reviews of the claims that "concluded without findings of unlawful conduct." And it argued that the shareholders had failed to show that statements by its executives "were made with intent to deceive or caused shareholders any losses."
The District Court dismissed the lawsuit, but a federal appeals court reinstated it in November. The shareholders and the company have told the District Court that they expect to submit a settlement by June 15 for the court's approval.
Some utility experts said NextEra's political activities were likely to be scrutinized as the company sought approval for its $66.8 billion purchase of Dominion.
"I think there will be pushback," said Eric Smith, associate director of the Tulane Energy Institute at Tulane University's Freeman School of Business. "I don't think the deal is going to fail, but certainly you're going to see some real questions about it."
NextEra, based in Juno Beach in South Florida, has about six million utility customers in that state, and Dominion, based in Richmond, Va., has around four million in Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina. The companies have said their deal would allow NextEra to better meet the growing need for electricity, driven in part by data centers.
 "Electricity demand is rising faster than it has in decades," John Ketchum, NextEra's chief executive, said in a statement announcing the deal. "We are bringing NextEra Energy and Dominion Energy together because scale matters more than ever."
In addition to regulated utilities in the four Southeastern states, the combined company would own nuclear power plants, solar farms, wind energy projects, power lines and gas pipelines across the country.
The deal requires the approval of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and regulators in Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina. The Justice Department's antitrust division is also expected to review the acquisition. Regulators in Florida do not have the legal authority to review utility mergers.
Neither NextEra nor Dominion responded to requests for comment for this article.
NextEra has long had an extensive and sophisticated political operation. The company gave $1.9 million to federal campaigns in 2023 and 2024, more than any other investor-owned utility company, according to Open Secrets, a nonprofit that tracks money in politics. The company appears to have given roughly similar amounts to Republicans and Democrats.
It has also cultivated the Trump administration. NextEra was the only power company to donate to the construction of President Trump's planned White House ballroom, according to a list of contributors the White House released last fall.
A NextEra executive was among the invitees to a dinner at the White House in October for donors who gave $2.5 million or more to the ballroom project. The company also donated $1 million to Mr. Trump's 2025 inaugural committee.
Susie Wiles, Mr. Trump's chief of staff, who was formerly a lobbyist and political consultant, worked as a consultant to NextEra's subsidiary Florida Power & Light in 2019 as it sought to acquire JEA, formerly known as the Jacksonville Electric Authority, according to an investigation by the Jacksonville City Council into that $11 billion deal, which was not completed. Ms. Wiles was also working as a consultant to JEA around the same time, according to the Council's investigation.
A spokesman for the White House, Steven Cheung, said that although Florida Power & Light had once hired Ms. Wiles as a communications consultant for a project, she had never represented NextEra and was not "attempting to elevate this company."
"Anyone who works with Susie Wiles knows that she holds herself to the highest ethical standards," Mr. Cheung said.
David Pomerantz, the executive director of the Energy and Policy Institute, a nonprofit group that has long tracked and been critical of NextEra, said its record should concern regulators and lawmakers in states where Dominion operates.
"NextEra's playbook and history in Florida should make Virginians and South Carolinians terrified of this merger," he said. Mr. Pomerantz pointed to the 2023 shareholder lawsuit, whose plaintiffs included two Florida public pension funds - the City of Hollywood Police Officers' Retirement System and the Pembroke Pines Firefighters and Police Officers' Pension Fund.
That lawsuit claims that in the 2020 election cycle a consulting firm hired by Florida Power & Light, Matrix, funded little-known candidates to derail the re-election campaigns of Democratic legislators. The candidates backed by the consulting firm were not the power company's preferred choice but were expected to siphon votes away from the lawmakers. The aim was to improve the chances of candidates who favored easing state regulations on utilities.
Florida newspapers reported on the effort at the time, and some reporters said the utility's consultants had subjected them to retaliation. Newspapers, including The Miami Herald and The Florida Times-Union, obtained records showing that the consultants had, among other things, hired a private investigator to follow and photograph the home and family vacation of at least one of the journalists.
The investor lawsuit also cited reports that NextEra had acted improperly when it tried to buy JEA.
That acquisition, which was opposed by members of the City Council and many residents, fell apart, and federal prosecutors brought criminal charges against some of the authority's officials. Its chief executive was found guilty of conspiracy to embezzle municipal funds and wire fraud in connection with a sale of the municipal utility. He was sentenced to four years in prison.
The lawsuit said investors were concerned by news reports that some political consultants with ties to NextEra and Jacksonville officials had promised lucrative jobs to local elected officials if they supported the deal.
As part of its investigation, the City Council subpoenaed NextEra executives for records. Prosecutors did not bring any charges against the power company or its employees and consultants.
In January 2023, Wall Street began to grow concerned about Florida Power & Light because of the news coverage. That month, NextEra reported that its financial performance had fallen short of analysts' expectations and that its chief executive for more than 11 years, Eric Silagy, was retiring, which surprised investors. The company's stock price fell almost 9 percent in five days.
That stock decline led to the shareholder lawsuit. NextEra has said it never broke any laws or misled investors.
A federal judge, Aileen M. Cannon, dismissed the lawsuit in 2024, but the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit overturned her decision in November.
Consumer groups said that if NextEra was allowed to buy Dominion, the company would become even more formidable. They noted that most states employ small offices to represent residents in utility matters before regulators and lawmakers.
"Every time a utility gets bigger, it becomes much more of a challenge," said David Springe, executive director of the National Association of State Utility Consumer Advocates, a professional group for those offices. "Consumer advocate offices are generally small and not funded very well."

The state of South Carolina is facing daunting challenges far beyond its growing population. As artificial intelligence advances, data centers are proliferating to support it, and the governor is pushing small nuclear reactors and the revival of a half-built nuclear plant to power those data centers.
Electricity costs could rise, environments could be stressed.
But in the state capital of Columbia, Republicans who dominate the South Carolina legislature are pressing to restrict the agencies that would regulate such changes, arguing for a different imperative - economic growth.
"We do not want to have unelected bureaucrats making rules and laws that are forced upon people," State Representative G. Murrell Smith Jr., the Republican speaker of the State House, said in an interview.
South Carolina's Small Business Regulatory Freedom Act is in the vanguard of a broad push by conservative state lawmakers to pass laws this year that would remove state-level controls on business, work places and the environment.
Legislation in South Carolina and at least 16 other statehouses would shift power away from state agencies by subjecting to legislative scrutiny any regulation that would cost at least $1 million to implement. Regulations that do survive would automatically expire after a fixed term unless specifically reauthorized.
A federal deregulation bill that would do the same has failed repeatedly to clear the Senate. So the states are taking up the call.

"Taxes are one of the big costs of government, but the regulatory burden is sometimes even more difficult because you don't see it," said Grover Norquist, at right, a veteran anti-tax activist in Washington.
"Taxes are one of the big costs of government, but the regulatory burden is sometimes even more difficult because you don't see it," Grover Norquist, a veteran anti-tax activist in Washington, said at a recent news conference in Columbia to push for South Carolina's version.
As of now, nine states have such far-reaching laws in place. But after the Supreme Court's landmark decision in 2024 to limit the power of regulatory agencies, states like Wisconsin and Florida at the forefront of the movement could soon be followed by a flood of others seeking to shackle their own state regulators, said Jaimie Cavanaugh, senior state policy counsel for the Pacific Legal Foundation, a libertarian public interest law firm that has worked on some of the bills.
The American Legislative Executive Council, a conservative organization that focuses on state legislatures, has crafted model legislation to go after "administrative agencies with insufficient democratic controls."
South Carolina's version passed unanimously in the State House last year, and Mr. Smith said he was cautiously optimistic that the State Senate would follow suit as early as next month. Supporters say it would reduce the number of state regulations by 25 percent.
At stake in the national drive are protections placed by agencies even in conservative states on labor, water and air quality, and the consumer - especially at a time when the Trump administration is pressing to roll back similar regulations imposed by federal agencies. Meantime, A.I. and crypto currencies are advancing with minimal oversight, while the president seeks to boost coal burning, scrap automobile fuel efficiency standards and eliminate all controls on climate change.
Proponents of deregulation ignore "what regulation is really about: protecting people, saving lives, making markets more fair," said Rachel Weintraub, executive director of Coalition for Sensible Safeguards, a national alliance that defends consumer and environmental regulations.
South Carolina's version would require, among other demands, that agencies eliminate two regulations for every one that they create. And it would empower courts to independently interpret laws and regulations without giving agencies' arguments extra weight. Kansas this year approved a similar law empowering courts to set aside their traditional deference to regulatory agencies.
"It takes more than a legislature to run a government," said State Senator Brad Hutto, at left in a meeting room in Columbia, S.C.
Opponents say paring regulations by numerical mandates is hardly thoughtful policy, especially given the dizzying changes that South Carolina is facing.
It also may be trying to solve a problem that doesn't exist. The Mercatus Center, a libertarian-leaning research organization at George Mason University, says the state, the 23rd-most populous, is the 36th least regulated.
"I'm unaware of a huge gaping example of a regulation that has been so onerous that it hasn't come to our attention and we haven't addressed it," said State Senator Brad Hutto, a Democrat and the minority leader, adding that the legislature already reviews regulations, as does a longstanding small business regulatory review committee led by business owners.
Instead, he believes the goal is to weaken the executive branch by saddling agencies with more paperwork, and inhibiting their day-to-day work.
"It takes more than a legislature to run a government," Mr. Hutto said in his Statehouse office, where he displays a signed copy of the 2001 State of the State address delivered by former Gov. Jim Hodges, the last Democrat to hold that office.
"We've got to have state agencies, totally functioning state agencies, to carry out and execute the laws," he continued. "Part of the execution of those laws is to build them out in the technical areas that we just don't have any expertise in."
The South Carolina bill might save businesses money, but it will cost the government at least $4.5 million annually to implement, according to the legislature's fiscal impact analysis. The biggest share, $1.6 million, would be shouldered by the Department of Environmental Services. That agency now reviews regulations every five years for possible streamlining, the analysis noted. If the bill passes, such reviews would have to be continuous.
During a walk along the Congaree River in West Columbia, Meagan Diedolf, president of the Conservation Voters of South Carolina, and Bill Stangler, the Congaree Riverkeeper, said environmental regulations and reforms had helped the community clean up a polluted waterway that is now used for recreation and community events.
"So many people are making regulation a dirty word," Mr. Stangler said. "But we depend on those regs for environmental protection. These are the rules that are meant to protect people, and it's everything from dam safety to day care. It's gas pumps. It's restaurant food safety, public swimming pools, everything that touches everyday life."
Ms. Nicholls, at left, closes her pet and livestock store two or three hours a day, a couple of times a week, to deal with paperwork for regulatory permits.
On the other side are people like the owner of a popular barbecue restaurant in Florence and the owner of a clothing boutique in Chester who have been working with the South Carolina chapter of Americans for Prosperity, a conservative advocacy group. They say regulations have cost them time and money and hampered their expansion plans.
Gail Nicholls, who owns Red Bug Barn, a pet and livestock supply store in Richburg, S.C., said it was important to protect water, air and food. But, she added, she needs one permit to grow, ship and sell plants, and another to sell eggs and chicks. To deal with the paperwork, she closes her store two or three hours a day, a couple of times a week.
"All these folders," she said, pointing to a teetering stack in her tiny office, "represent something different I have to do."

Representative Buddy Carter, a former pharmacy owner who brands himself as a "MAGA warrior," is one of three top candidates in the Republican primary for Senate in Georgia on Tuesday.
Here are five things to know about Mr. Carter, 68, of St. Simons Island on the southeastern Georgia coast.
1. He is a Trump acolyte. Mr. Carter voted to overturn the 2020 presidential election, introduced a resolution in support of Mr. Trump receiving the Nobel Peace Prize and has said he has no points of disagreement with the president. He also once introduced a measure to authorize Mr. Trump to enter into talks to acquire Greenland and rename it "Red, White, and Blueland." All three candidates running in the primary have sought to align themselves with the president, who has not endorsed a candidate.
2. He has vocally backed the war with Iran. Mr. Carter has been forceful in supporting Mr. Trump's decision to start the war, describing it as "very necessary," even as some Republicans have shied away from talking about the unpopular conflict. "What we're paying at the gas pump is a small price to pay in order to save millions of lives in the future," Mr. Carter told NewsNation in March, adding, "This is a painful experience at the pump right now, but that is going to stabilize."
3. He ran a small pharmacy chain. Mr. Carter's business, Carter's Pharmacy Inc., included three pharmacies. He ran the business for more than three decades. He holds a B.S. in pharmacy from the University of Georgia. He was a central architect of measures, passed by Congress in February, intended to lower drug costs by placing new rules on the practices of large companies that oversee prescription benefits.
4. He has shown a bipartisan flair on energy issues. Mr. Carter has said he believes human society has an effect on climate change, and he has worked with Democrats on renewable energy legislation. He has expressed pride in efforts in Georgia to corral solar and nuclear energy. "We've done our part in using clean energy here," he said in an interview.
5. He says he has been pressing Mr. Trump to endorse him. He said Friday that he last spoke to Mr. Trump about two weeks ago and that he would continue to push the president to intervene in the contest. "My hope is that he will endorse us at some point," Mr. Carter said in the interview, but he added, "I don't know that he will weigh in."

The backlash against energy-guzzling data centers has snowballed in recent months, prompting more than 100 proposed moratoriums at the local, county, state and national level.
Proposals for data center moratoriums fall into two categories: Most call for a short-term pause in permitting or construction to give local governments time to establish guidelines. A few others call for permanent construction bans.
Cities including Tulsa, Okla.; New Orleans; Birmingham, Ala.; and Ypsilanti Township, Mich.; have all implemented temporary bans on permitting or construction, as have dozens of other counties and towns, according to a database maintained by the hedge fund Interconnected Capital.
Bigger state-level proposals have so far seen mixed results. Democrats and Republicans in 14 states have proposed construction pauses. In April, Maine lawmakers passed a temporary statewide moratorium on new data centers, but it was vetoed by Gov. Janet Mills, a Democrat.
On Friday, New York lawmakers passed their own statewide ban on large data centers.
Today, we look at where this is happening, why the politics of the issue have shifted so quickly and why the issue does not fall neatly along party lines.
New York's bill
If all 28 of the big data centers currently planned for New York State were to fire up, they could expand the state's energy use by roughly a third, State Senator Kristen Gonzalez, a Democrat, told the Times.
New York, like some other Northeastern states, is already struggling to follow through on its plans to make deep emissions cuts by 2030, and the legislature recently watered down its climate goals. Advocates for climate action worry that it could be impossible for renewable energy installations to keep pace with all the new demand, and that many of the new data centers might be powered by gas.
The State Legislature approved a plan to pause construction of "hyper-scale" data centers, or facilities capable of using of more than 20 megawatts of electricity, for one year. If signed into law by Gov. Kathy Hochul, a Democrat, New York would be the first state to enact a statewide moratorium.
In New York, momentum for the one-year moratorium built quickly, said Alex Beauchamp, northern regional director at Food and Water Watch, a nonprofit advocacy group that pushed for the bill. The N.A.A.C.P. and the League of Women Voters both supported the measure.
 "The politics and the movement on data centers is just growing at a speed that is unlike anything else in the environmental movement, and maybe unlike anything else happening in the U.S.," he said.
Kristin Devoe, a spokeswoman for Hochul, said the governor would review the bill.
Public opinion sours
Voters' opinions on new data centers have done a U-turn in recent months, according to polling by Heatmap News. Last August, four out of 10 respondents said they'd oppose a data center being built in their area. By May, the number had risen to seven out of 10.
The survey found that people don't just care about their own backyards. More than half supported a moratorium that covers the entire nation. (Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, an independent, and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a New York Democrat, have introduced legislation to enact what they call a "reasonable pause" on data center development.)
Americans are blaming data centers for rising energy bills, and many are feeling pessimistic about the broader effects A.I. will have on society, the survey found. Opponents have also raised concerns about noise, water use and air pollution.
Another factor driving opposition is the speed at which new facilities are opening. As Bloomberg News pointed out this month, data center construction spending topped $50 billion in April, surpassing total U.S. public spending on transportation projects like airports and subways.
Put another way, power demand from data centers is expected to double in 2027 compared with 2025, Goldman Sachs estimated in May, even though about half of announced projects are expected to open late or get canceled.
Local groups opposing data centers have notched some high-profile wins in recent weeks. A massive facility proposed by the "Shark Tank" co-star Kevin O'Leary cut its footprint in half last week after intense blowback from residents and local politicians, Bloomberg News reported.
Perhaps no state better exemplifies the strange political fault lines of the data center debate than Maine, where the Legislature, controlled by Democrats, passed a moratorium that was vetoed by the Democratic governor.
In a statement to the Legislature, Gov. Janet Mills wrote that while she supported a data center moratorium in general, she could not sign the bill because it would threaten the construction of a specific project that would bring jobs and tax revenue to the Town of Jay, which has about 4,600 residents.
A similar tension was evident in Michigan last week after Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, faced blowback from members of her own party for posing in a photo with Sam Altman, the OpenAI chief executive, at a groundbreaking for a $16 billion data center in Saline Township.
Asked about the criticism, Whitmer told an ABC affiliate that the facility was expected to create good jobs and run on a closed-loop water system. In the same interview, Whitmer said she would not support a data center moratorium.
In New York, Hochul faces the next data center test. Beauchamp said his group would push her to sign the bill. The politics of data centers are evolving quickly, he said. "It's less left versus right, and more whether you see yourself as an establishment person or a populist," Beauchamp said.
Hochul has until December to make her decision.
RENEWABLES
Welcome to the me-first era of energy
From South America to Southeast Asia, governments and private companies are being forced to look inward and take steps to harness what they can domestically, even when doing so raises upfront costs.
Call it the era of me-first energy.
Guyana, a fast-growing South American oil producer, which ran short of fuel this spring, is discussing building its first refinery. Indonesia is accelerating plans to harness more power from the sun. Many other Asian countries have turned to coal in order to plug their energy gaps, at least for now. And in Europe, Belgium is trying to nationalize nuclear energy.
Individuals are also taking matters into their own hands, buying electric vehicles to avoid rising fuel costs or installing rooftop solar panels to lower electricity bills. - Rebecca F. Elliott
Pakistan ranks among the countries most vulnerable to climate change, and few of its districts have experienced as many climate extremes as Dadu. One temperature reading in the district, in southern Pakistan, reached 124.7 degrees Fahrenheit, or 51.5 Celsius, on May 28, the highest in the country this year.
"It feels as if the sun has come down closer to the earth," said Abdul Khaliq, 48, a farmer.
By midday, farmers abandon fields, brick-kiln workers gather in the shade and vendors pack away stalls. Children jump into ponds, while herders lead buffaloes into the water for relief.
Recently, blinding sandstorms have swept across Dadu, a sign of the monsoon's onset and the possibility of floods. While monsoon rains have long been variable, experts have linked the severity of devastating floods in 2022 to climate change.
At one point during that catastrophe, Khaliq found himself chest-deep in water, trying to save his family and livestock. Much of Dadu had been submerged. Villages became islands, accessible only by boat. Families struggled to find dry land even to bury their dead.
The 2022 disaster caused about $30 billion in damages across Pakistan, and Khaliq's family is still recovering, as are many of his neighbors. - Zia ur-Rehman

In his first year back in office, President Trump has rapidly reshaped America's climate and energy landscape. His administration dismantled a wide range of climate and pollution regulations, began to overhaul how the federal government responds to disasters and gave a boost to fossil fuel production and nuclear power while attempting to curtail the growth of wind and solar energy.
The changes have reverberated far beyond the United States, as the administration has pressured other countries to abandon their own efforts to tackle global warming. Here's a look at some of the biggest changes in U.S. energy and climate policy in 2025:
Environmental rules
Over the past year, the Environmental Protection Agency has moved to delay, ease or eliminate more than a dozen regulations governing air pollution, water contamination and planet-warming greenhouse gas emissions, a New York Times analysis found.
The Times analysis, based on research from Harvard Law School, Columbia Law School and other sources, counted four proposed rollbacks of air pollution rules. In June, for instance, the E.P.A. moved to repeal a Biden-era regulation that required coal-burning power plants to cut emissions of mercury, a neurotoxin.

Soon after being sworn in on Tuesday, Gov. Mikie Sherrill of New Jersey signed six executive orders aimed at tackling the state's high electricity costs, its vexing regulatory processes and the risks that technology poses to children's safety and mental health.
The quick succession of executive orders - she paused in the middle of her inaugural address to sign two - dovetailed with key priorities that Ms. Sherrill, a Democrat, identified while campaigning for governor.
Her first signature as New Jersey's 57th governor was on an order that dedicated state funds for consumer rebates to offset future electricity rate hikes and gave the state's Board of Public Utilities new powers to pause or modify actions that could result in higher customer costs.
"The current cost of electricity has reached the point of crisis for many residents and families and requires bold action to provide short-term relief and medium and long-term strategies and reforms to improve our energy system," she wrote.
Her second executive order addressed the complexities of energy pricing and the need to increase in-state power generation. Ms. Sherrill specifically ordered the state's utility board to seek out new solar power opportunities by March 1 and to sign contracts before the end of the year.

The order also created a Nuclear Power Task Force, which will be responsible for developing new nuclear generation facilities in New Jersey.
Justin Balik of Evergreen Action, an advocacy group focused on addressing climate change, called Ms. Sherrill's orders a "smart combination" of ratepayer relief and longer-term efforts to "deliver systemic reforms for a lower-cost energy system."
"It is refreshing to see a governor not only correctly diagnose what's wrong with our energy system, but also demonstrate the clear political will to fix it," Mr. Balik said in a statement.
The third executive order laid out ethical standards for state employees, and the fourth created a new job title: the state's chief operating officer. Ms. Sherrill, who served four terms in Congress, appointed Kellie Doucette, her former House legislative director, as New Jersey's first chief operating officer and gave her broad responsibilities for "organizational effectiveness."
Ms. Sherrill's fifth executive order aimed to simplify and modernize the state's regulatory processes and established what she calls a "cross-agency permitting team." Borrowing a basketball phrase, she said her administration would require agencies to set "permitting shot clocks" with an eye toward reducing the time it takes to issue necessary project approvals.
The final Day 1 executive order created a new office within the Department of Health to coordinate efforts to keep children safe online. It directed all state agencies with jurisdiction over issues tied to children and technology to "prioritize children's mental health outcomes."
Ms. Sherrill said that recorded increases in the rate of anxiety, depression and suicidal thoughts among children coincided with widespread cellphone use and the rapid growth of social media and artificial intelligence technologies.
This, she said, had "fundamentally altered how children communicate, learn and socialize."
"A coordinated, whole-of-government approach is necessary to identify opportunities for the state to improve children's mental health outcomes in the context of internet and social media use," she wrote.

Clean energy isn't dead in the Trump era. But it does look different these days.
Since returning to office, President Trump has dismantled federal efforts to fight climate change and vowed to stop new wind turbines from going up. His administration has canceled billions of dollars in funding for technologies that might one day help reduce planet-warming emissions, and it has instead pushed to expand domestic oil and gas drilling.
Those moves have taken a brutal toll on America's budding clean energy industry, including canceled offshore wind farms, shuttered electric-car factories and layoffs at climate technology start-ups.
Yet many clean energy executives say they are finding ways to adapt, and some promising technologies that might help slow global warming are moving forward.
Some industries, such as geothermal energy or nuclear power, still receive support from the Trump administration. Start-ups that could help cut emissions from factories are figuring out how to survive without federal support. Others, such as battery companies, are looking to pitch themselves as a solution for the artificial intelligence and data center boom.
More than 300 start-ups attended a major annual energy industry summit this week, known as CERAWeek by S&P Global, showcasing ideas for investors and policymakers like advanced batteries that can store power for multiple days and lower-emission jet fuel.
"We've just gone through an era of radical uncertainty" for clean energy, said Alex Kizer, an executive vice president at the Energy Futures Initiative, a Washington nonprofit organization. "And for a lot of companies, there are big questions on how they'll evolve going forward."
A crowd sits and listens to a panel discussion.
The Carbon and Climate Hub at the CERAWeek conference on Wednesday.Credit...Danielle Villasana/Reuters
'Wishful thinking'
One big shift is how the industry seeks to find new investments for ideas that could bring major climate benefits. Many executives said they were no longer counting on government subsidies or the good will of environmentally minded politicians to support their business.
"For years, the clean tech world had a lot of idealistic founders who felt that the rules of capitalism had changed, that politics would entirely reorient itself around stopping carbon dioxide emissions, and that's how we were going to make money," said Cody Finke, the founder of a start-up called Brimstone. "And I think that was wishful thinking."
When Brimstone was founded in 2019, the company aimed to produce cement with half the carbon-dioxide emissions of regular cement, by using carbon-free silicate rocks instead of limestone. The Biden administration awarded the company a $189 million grant as part of its push to reduce carbon emissions from heavy industry. But the Trump administration abruptly canceled the grant last year.
Mr. Finke said Brimstone hasn't been deterred. The company recently announced that it had refined its process so it can harvest those same silicate rocks to produce both cement and other valuable industrial materials like alumina, a precursor to aluminum that the United States typically imports. The bet is that by producing multiple products together, Brimstone can become economically competitive with traditional cement makers.
"If you're going to solve the climate problem," Mr. Finke said, "you're going to have to find solutions that just have fundamentally better economics."
Other companies are making similar bets that they can displace fossil fuels even without government subsidies.
Another start-up, AtmosZero, is developing giant heat pumps that can be used instead of gas-fired boilers to generate steam for industrial facilities. The company is already testing its technology at a brewery in Fort Collins, Colo., trying to demonstrate that electrifying can make financial sense for companies - while also being cleaner.
 "A decade ago, you might've called us clean tech or climate tech, but we're really focused on the value of electrification," said Addison Stark, the start-up's chief executive. "We want our technology to be cost-effective no matter which way the policy pendulum swings."
Other clean energy firms are increasingly billing themselves as a solution to the A.I. boom.
Electricity demand is rising for the first time in decades as tech giants build hundreds of energy-hungry A.I. data centers. Although many are being powered by new natural gas plants, big tech companies like Google, Microsoft and Amazon say they are still committed to reducing their overall carbon emissions. That has provided a boost to wind and solar firms that have otherwise faced major obstacles from the Trump administration.
"The reality is that renewables are often the fastest energy source we can deploy," said Sandhya Ganapathy, chief executive of EDP Renewables North America, a leading wind and solar developer. "So even if we have not had very favorable clean energy policy in the last 12 months, we continue to see significant amounts of procurement from corporates and utilities."
Batteries are also benefiting. Crusoe, a data center developer, announced this week major partnerships with Form Energy, which has developed a new type of iron-air battery that can store 100 hours' worth of electricity, far more than traditional batteries, as well as with Redwood Materials, which is recycling old electric car batteries to provide grid storage.
The Trump administration has largely scorned wind and solar power and has sought to promote fossil fuels like natural gas and coal as the most important near-term solutions to rising electricity demand. Yet officials have also provided support and money to low-emissions energy sources like advanced nuclear power and next-generation geothermal.
Geothermal energy, in particular, is emerging as one of the big renewable energy winners of the current era. Traditionally, geothermal production was limited to a handful of locations, such as Iceland or California, where companies could easily tap underground hot water reservoirs close to the surface.
But in recent years, some start-ups - most notably, a company called Fervo Energy - have sought to adapt modern drilling techniques from the oil and gas industry to tap underground heat in more places. This has raised hopes that geothermal could offer a vast new source of emissions-free power that, unlike wind and solar, can run at all hours. The industry has also received significant investments from oil and gas firms that have experience with large-scale drilling.
"We're at the very beginning of this potential revolution that I think we're entering into in a big way," Kyle Haustveit, a former petroleum engineer who is now at the Energy Department as assistant secretary for the hydrocarbons and geothermal energy office, said at a CERAweek panel. He compared it to the early days of the shale revolution, which unlocked enormous amounts of natural gas in the United States.
And casualties, too
Yet Trump's return to office has also brought a lot of clean energy casualties.
Last month, Sublime Systems, a Boston-based clean tech start-up, announced that it was laying off two-thirds of its workers. The company had developed a novel process to make carbon-free cement using electricity and signed a deal to produce more than 600,000 tons of cement for Microsoft. With the help of an $87 million grant from the Biden administration, it was building its first factory in Holyoke, Mass.
The Trump administration terminated that grant last year as part of billions of dollars in cuts to Biden-era funding. In a statement, Sublime said the cancellation created "compounding challenges" for financing, and work on the Holyoke facility has paused. The company says it still hopes to build its first factory, whether in North America or Europe, and continues to talk to the Energy Department about restoring its award.
Another technology that has faltered is known as "green hydrogen," the production of clean-burning hydrogen fuel using wind or solar power. Many firms have abandoned those efforts, in part because the Trump administration has cut funding and because the process requires vast amounts of cheap electricity - electricity that is now being diverted to data centers.
"If you're a clean energy technology that was depending on cheap grid power for your business, you're in a lot of trouble right now," said David Crane, who served as the under secretary for infrastructure at the Energy Department in the Biden administration. "Especially with how much the hyperscalers are willing to pay for that electricity."
During the Biden years, there was also a surge of interest - and more than $3 billion in federal funding - for companies that were experimenting with techniques to pull carbon dioxide from the air in an effort to slow climate change.
But many of those companies are now scaling back, as global warming has faded as a national political priority and federal funds have been in limbo. Climeworks, one Swiss start-up that was pursuing carbon-removal, laid off one-fifth of its staff last May. The company cited "shifting policy priorities where climate tech is seeing reduced momentum in some areas" and uncertainty surrounding a project in Louisiana backed by the federal government.
"Carbon removal is definitely an out-of-favor category for early-stage investors," said Johanna Wolfson, a co-founder of the venture capital firm Azolla Ventures. "And from a climate perspective, that's worrying. We know what the climate trends are. So the risk is when concern swings back, these solutions won't be ready when we need them."
Some clean tech start-ups facing an unfavorable political landscape in the United States could end up looking for opportunities overseas, Ms. Wolfson added. She mentioned companies in Azolla's portfolio that make floating offshore wind turbines or that are trying to capture carbon dioxide from the exhaust of ships.
China has vowed in its latest five-year plan to invest heavily in nascent clean-energy technologies, including green hydrogen and nuclear fusion. Some analysts wonder whether China, which has come to dominate industries like solar panels and electric vehicles, could soon eclipse the United States in those realms, too.
 "The United States has historically been the best at inventing new technologies," said Mr. Kizer of the Energy Futures Initiative. "But where we are absolutely losing our edge is in scaling new technologies and developing a domestic market for them so that we can export them. So where else could we see that happen?"

Prime Minister Viktor Orban's crushing loss in Sunday's election in Hungary deals a serious blow to the Kremlin, which for years relied on Budapest as a rare friend inside the European Union. But Moscow still retains significant energy leverage over the landlocked nation, complicating any aggressive break with Russia.
That reality creates a delicate situation for the incoming prime minister, Peter Magyar, whose Tisza party won a large majority in Parliament in part by vowing to normalize tense relations with the European Union and NATO.
On the campaign trail, Mr. Magyar said that Hungary did not want to become the first American-Russian colony, referring to Mr. Orban's support from both President Trump and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. Mr. Magyar vowed to support a free, European Hungary, to root out corruption and to take a cleareyed approach to Moscow.
"Anybody who knows Hungarian history knows that we were attacked many times by Russia," Mr. Magyar noted in an interview with The New York Times in 2024.
Still, Mr. Magyar signaled that he would not fully sever ties with Moscow, embracing pragmatism given the energy dependency that Mr. Orban's government has built up over 16 years in power. Mr. Magyar will inherit a struggling Hungarian economy that imports more than 80 percent of its natural gas and crude oil from Russia. He said that Hungary would work to diversify its energy supplies but laid out a distant timeline for doing so.
That is likely to give Moscow some influence in Hungary for years to come. But more immediately, the election defeat of Mr. Orban deprives Mr. Putin of one of his most effective allies in advancing his goal of dividing Europe, which the Russian leader has come to see as a bitter adversary.
Want to stay updated on what's happening in Hungary and Russia? Sign up for Your Places: Global Update, and we'll send our latest coverage to your inbox.
Mr. Putin's estrangement from the continent hardened after it largely rallied around Ukraine in the war that Russia started more than four years ago. Mr. Orban was the European Union's most vocal internal critic, and he often stood in the way of the bloc's policy goals.
Mr. Orban's actions stalled European responses to Russia's invasion, including by blocking a loan of 90 billion euros, about $105 billion, to Ukraine and sanctions packages targeting Russia, and by opposing the opening of talks to bring Kyiv into the union. His continued purchases of Russian energy helped Moscow retain an economic foothold in Europe as most of the rest of the continent moved to cut such ties.
The Kremlin will probably try to adapt to the new Hungarian government, said Andras Racz, a senior fellow at the German Council on Foreign Relations, a research group.

"The Orban government was not a moral ally, not a spiritual ally. The Orban government was a pragmatic, corrupt ally," he said. "If such an ally loses power, Russia is usually ready to drop these guys or push these guys under the bus."
Mr. Magyar's victory was so convincing, Mr. Racz said, "that it would be simply irrational for the Kremlin not to shift."
That shift was already evident on Monday.
"Hungary made its choice. We respect that choice," the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, told reporters. "We expect that we will continue our very pragmatic contacts with the new leadership of Hungary."
Mr. Peskov said that Russia would like to continue to have a positive relationship with Hungary and noted that maintaining dialogue would be good for both Moscow and Budapest. Russia is and will remain "one of the most reliable suppliers of energy in the world," Mr. Peskov added.
Russia played a significant role in the election, with Moscow working actively to sway the vote in Mr. Orban's favor, according to analysts, who noted that Mr. Orban's campaign messages demonizing President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine borrowed from Russian intelligence talking points.
Those efforts, however, were hurt by leaks of calls and transcripts in which Mr. Orban and his lieutenants pledged fealty to officials from Moscow. Some Hungarians chanted anti-Russian slogans during rallies for Mr. Magyar and his party, Tisza.
"Much of Hungary voted for Tisza because they wanted to get rid of this Russian dependency," said Zselyke Csaky, a senior research fellow at the Center for European Reform, based in Brussels. "But once governing starts, and Tisza has more clarity on what this relationship means, perhaps they will have some hard decisions to make."
One place where there will be immediate change is in Russia's influence over Hungarian media and security services, Mr. Racz, the analyst, predicted. He said that the new government would almost certainly move quickly to sever ties that Mr. Orban had developed and might politely send certain Russian diplomats home.
Additionally, Hungary is very likely to stop playing a spoiler role in the European Union's efforts to support Ukraine. But Ms. Csaky said that she expected Mr. Magyar to remain cautious in his Ukraine policy, given divisions in the Hungarian electorate and the continued energy dependency on Russia
As Hungary looks to find new energy sources, Mr. Racz said that the incoming government would likely start with Russian oil, the easiest energy source to diversify. Ending its dependency on Russian natural gas and nuclear power will be more difficult, Mr. Racz noted.
In 2021, Hungary signed a 15-year contract for Russian natural gas that could be impossible to exit quickly. And nearly half of the country's electricity comes from a Soviet-built power plant in Paks, southern Hungary. That facility uses Russian fuel and is being expanded by Russia's state nuclear giant in a deal that could be hard to unwind.
Mr. Magyar has said that, before making any decisions, he needs to understand the details of the energy contracts that Mr. Orban signed with Russia.
The new Hungarian government is likely to try to make Russia compete with alternative energy suppliers rather than push Moscow out entirely, Mr. Racz said.
"In terms of energy security, radical immediate changes are very, very rare," he said. "So, yes, Russia maintains certain leverage."

The Trump administration this week threatened to pull the United States out of the world's leading energy agency unless it abandoned its focus on tackling climate change.
Energy Secretary Chris Wright said that the International Energy Agency had become a "climate advocacy organization" and should stop publishing its annual road map for how countries could eliminate their planet-warming fossil fuel emissions by 2050, known as its "net zero scenario."
"We don't need a net zero scenario, that's ridiculous, it's not going to happen," Mr. Wright, a former gas executive, said on Tuesday at a side event during the agency's annual meeting of energy ministers in Paris. He said he wanted the agency to "focus on energy security," but added that "if they insist that it's so dominated and infused with climate stuff, then we're out."
The International Energy Agency is enormously influential, and its data and reports on everything from oil stockpiles to electric vehicle sales are frequently cited by energy companies and investors as a basis for long-term planning. The United States provides around 14 percent of the agency's budget and is among its 32 member states.
Founded in 1974 in the aftermath of a global oil crisis, the agency was originally created to monitor global crude oil supplies and help prevent price shocks. Since 2015, however, the agency has broadened its focus under the leadership of Fatih Birol, a Turkish economist. Many member nations have urged the agency to pay more attention to rapidly growing energy technologies such as solar panels and electric vehicles, as well as the risks of global warming.
Mr. Wright's remarks were the latest effort by the Trump administration to persuade other countries and international organizations to scale back efforts to address climate change and instead to continue to rely on fossil fuels like oil, gas and coal, the main drivers of rising global temperatures. The United States is the world's largest oil and gas producer, and President Trump has dismissed global warming as a "hoax."
Mr. Trump has withdrawn the United States from the Paris climate agreement, a pact among nearly all of the world's nations to curb greenhouse gases. In October, the Trump administration also successfully pressured countries to halt a global agreement to slash emissions from cargo ships.
Those moves have created diplomatic tensions with European leaders, who have continued to place a high priority on trying to halt global warming.
In competing remarks this week, President Emmanuel Macron of France praised the International Energy Agency's work and said that Europe would keep trying to move away from fossil fuels and to expand low-emissions energy sources like wind, solar and nuclear power.
 "Scientists alert us every day about the dramatic risks of climate change," Mr. Macron said in a video address on Wednesday. He added that an "orderly, progressive transition away from fossil fuels is the key."
Europe has struggled with high energy prices for years, particularly after Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022 caused oil and gas prices to skyrocket. Many European leaders have said the continent needs to reduce its reliance on imported fossil fuels, though Trump administration officials have blamed Europe's high energy costs on its climate policies and heavy use of wind and solar power. It has urged European countries instead to buy more American gas.
The Trump administration's biggest dispute with the International Energy Agency has to do with the way it projects the future of the world's energy system.
Before 2020, the agency would publish an annual outlook that asked how the world's energy mix would continue to evolve if countries did not pass new policies, such as stricter fuel-efficiency standards for cars. These projections, known as the "current policies scenario," typically showed that oil, gas and coal were expected to dominate the global energy mix for decades to come.
But starting in 2020, the agency replaced that scenario with one that took into account policies that countries were expected to adopt going forward, particularly as they promised to tackle greenhouse gas emissions. This was known as the "stated policies scenario." In recent years, these scenarios have projected that global oil demand would stop growing this decade.
At the same time, the agency created the net zero scenario, which asked what changes would be needed if countries were to phase out fossil fuels rapidly in an effort to stop adding greenhouse gases to the atmosphere by 2050. Scientists have said that doing so would be necessary to keep average global warming to around 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit), compared with preindustrial levels, and limit the risks of heat waves, sea-level rise, species extinctions and other disasters.
The net zero scenario would involve drastic and rapid changes to the world's energy system, including shutting down most coal plants and replacing virtually all gasoline-powered cars on the road with electric models in just a few decades. Oil and gas production would also end up declining dramatically. Nations are very far from meeting that scenario, and global fossil fuel use was still rising as of last year.
The Trump administration has been pushing the International Energy Agency to change course. Last year, after intense lobbying by Mr. Wright, the agency restored its current policies scenario to its annual outlook, which projected that global oil and gas demand could continue rising for decades.
At a news conference on Thursday, Mr. Birol said that the agency had not decided whether it would continue to offer the net zero scenario.
Instead, Mr. Birol tried to emphasize many of the issues that countries still agreed on, even in an era of geopolitical turmoil. That included a new global alliance focused on providing clean cooking technologies to the two billion people around the world who still rely on polluting cooking methods like burning wood or dung indoors. It also included a new effort among countries to cooperate to secure supplies of rare earth metals and other critical minerals that have historically been dominated by China.
"I can tell you that during our discussions, there was much more common ground and agreements among the countries than the differences," Mr. Birol said.

The war in the Middle East is forcing a reckoning for nations dependent on liquefied natural gas, the fuel anchoring power generation across many of Asia's largest economies.
Now in its third week, the fighting has effectively closed the Strait of Hormuz and shut down Qatari production, removing about a fifth of the global supply of liquefied natural gas, or L.N.G., from the market.
This poses an existential threat to energy networks throughout Asia, by far the world's largest consumer of the fuel and the recipient of more than 80 percent of Qatar's exports. Locations including Japan, Singapore, Thailand, Taiwan, Pakistan and Bangladesh generate a third or more of their electricity from natural gas.
To ward off potential shortages, utilities across the region have competed to buy up remaining cargoes at record prices on the so-called spot market. Some are taking steps to ration energy and dip into state funds to alleviate price increases. Many facing supply shortages and price increases are turning back to coal-fired power plants.
Analysts and energy officials expect the impact of the disruptions to last far beyond the current conflict. In Asia, L.N.G. has long been called a bridge fuel - less polluting than coal, more reliable than renewables and capable of powering a region where ballooning populations and economic activity are set to drive more than half of global energy demand growth by 2050.
In a report released on Monday, Shell, the world's largest L.N.G. trader, estimated that consumption in Asia would help propel global demand for the fuel by as much as 85 percent by 2050, up from 422 million metric tons in 2025.
But that all depends on a reliable supply of the fuel. Because much of Asia's geography precludes cross-border pipelines, countries must rely on seafaring tankers from the world's two largest producers, the United States and Qatar. American gas is thousands of miles away, while Qatari supply is trapped behind the Strait of Hormuz, a choke point paralyzed by the war with Iran.
After Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, L.N.G. prices spiked as Europe raced to replace Russian pipeline gas with L.N.G. shipped at sea. Even before the U.S. strikes on Iran, Asian buyers were growing increasingly nervous about a market in which just two countries were set to dominate the majority of new supply through 2030.
For now, "Asia is in full price competition, with any country that can switch from gas to coal doing so," said Henning Gloystein, a managing director for energy at Eurasia Group, a political risk research firm.
The disruptions also underscore the longer-term risks of relying on L.N.G. "If you're an importer, you say: 'Well, there are two major crises in five years. We can't keep dealing with this,'" Mr. Gloystein said.
Japan plays a big role in the region as a middleman, importing and re-exporting L.N.G. to countries in Southeast Asia. For years, it and other sellers marketed L.N.G. as a way for countries dependent on coal to meet booming energy needs, while lowering emissions.
Many nations in Southeast Asia began significantly ramping up import volumes in the early 2010s as domestic gas reserves dwindled. Thailand led the push. The country built two major import terminals and took steps to liberalize its domestic gas market. By 2022, natural gas generated more than half its electricity, with L.N.G. accounting for nearly a quarter of that supply - up from just 2 percent in 2011, according to data from the Asia Pacific Energy Research Center, a research organization in Tokyo.
The Russia-Ukraine war dented confidence in L.N.G. When Moscow cut pipeline supplies to Europe in 2022, wealthy European nations pivoted to the global L.N.G. market, often outbidding developing Asian economies. The resulting shortages forced countries to curb imports and endure rolling blackouts. In Thailand, electricity rates rose to record highs, prompting the government to postpone the retirement of coal-fired units at the Mae Moh power plant.

Four years later, the pattern is repeating. This month, the Thai government ordered coal-fired power plants to operate at full capacity and began tapping heavily into a state energy-subsidy fund to help absorb price shocks.
With ships being rerouted, "it's once again widening economic disparities between the richer countries and the emerging economies," said Dinita Setyawati, an Indonesian-based senior energy analyst at Ember, a think tank.
In Bangladesh, utilities have begun significantly increasing their use of coal to create electricity since the start of the war in Iran, data from Bangladesh's state-owned company responsible for electricity transmission show.
Supply disruptions are causing problems in Asia's most developed economies as well. Taiwan's economy ministry said this month that it would be prepared to buy more L.N.G. from the United States and restart its retired Hsinta coal-fired power plant if supply disruptions persisted through April. South Korea is also preparing to boost nuclear and coal-fired power generation to offset volatility in oil and L.N.G. supply, its industry minister said last week.
"Asia is at an important junction," Ms. Setyawati said. In the wake of the 2022 energy crisis, L.N.G. was promoted as a stable alternative to pipeline gas because it could be shipped anywhere in the world. Now, those L.N.G. supply chains are grappling with their own bottlenecks.
"Energy security is vital for the continuation of economic development in this part of the world," Ms. Setyawati said.
At the same time, the United States - already the world's biggest supplier of L.N.G. - is boosting exports. Under his so-called energy dominance agenda, President Trump has rescinded a moratorium on new L.N.G. export terminal licenses. Even before the war with Iran, the administration was marketing L.N.G. to Asia, including from a $44 billion project in Alaska, as a stable alternative to Russian and Middle Eastern supplies.
For now, most analysts in Asia expect countries to continue temporarily switching to coal to replace expensive gas through the duration of the war. Further out, however, they have a choice to stick with L.N.G. or move more rapidly toward renewables, said Amy Kong, an analyst at the research group Zero Carbon Analytics.
She points to Pakistan, which, in the wake of the Russia-Ukraine war's disruption of natural gas markets, roughly tripled its solar energy capacity between 2021 and 2024. That shift, largely prompted by the proliferation of low-cost Chinese solar panels, helped the country reduce its dependence on L.N.G. imports.
While the country continues to grapple with significant energy disruptions, such as gas cutoffs affecting local producers like fertilizer plants, the shift toward renewables is shielding Pakistan from even greater instability, Ms. Kong said.
In Asia, "the immediate reaction will inevitably be leaning on domestic existing supplies, especially coal," she said. But five years out, "there will be more conversations about gas, and whether it really wins out against renewables in terms of economics and stable supply."

President Trump on Wednesday directed the Pentagon to start buying more electricity from coal-burning power plants as part of his efforts to revive the declining coal industry.
Mr. Trump signed an executive order directing Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth to enter into long-term contracts with coal plants across the country to power military installations. The move could provide financial support to dozens of coal plants that might have otherwise been set to retire in the coming years.
"We're going to be buying a lot of coal through the military now," Mr. Trump said at a White House event on coal. "We're lifting up our hard working American miners like nobody has ever done before."
At the event, more than a dozen coal executives and miners in hard hats presented Mr. Trump with a trophy that said "Undisputed Champion of Beautiful Clean Coal." The award came from the Washington Coal Club, an obscure group with financial ties to the coal mining industry.
Mr. Trump also announced that the Energy Department was awarding $175 million to upgrade six coal plants in Kentucky, North Carolina, Ohio and West Virginia.
At the same time, the Tennessee Valley Authority, the nation's largest federally owned electric utility, said this week it would postpone the retirement of its two largest coal plants, which had been set to close in 2027 and 2028.
The moves are part of an ongoing effort by the Trump administration to increase America's use of coal. Mr. Trump likes to refer to the fuel as "clean, beautiful coal" to goad environmentalists who point out that coal is the most polluting of all fossil fuels and the single biggest driver of global warming.
It also marks a remarkable turnaround in fortunes for the coal industry, which had been declining sharply in recent years. Since 2005, electric utilities have retired hundreds of older coal plants in favor of cleaner and cheaper natural gas, wind and solar power.
Mr. Trump has been determined to stop that slide.
Over the past nine months, the Energy Department has taken the extraordinary step of ordering eight coal-burning units that had been headed for retirement to stay open and keep running. Administration officials say they plan to stop the closing of as many additional coal plants as they can over the next three years.
At the same time, the administration is taking steps to improve the economics of coal. The Environmental Protection Agency has been rolling back several major Biden-era pollution rules that would have made it much more expensive, if not impossible, for many coal plants to keep operating. Coal plants produce more air pollution than other sources, and burning coal emits mercury, a powerful neurotoxin, and other heavy metals.
Last year, the amount of electricity produced by coal increased 13 percent, which in turn led to an uptick in America's planet-warming emissions.
Environmental and public health groups have sharply criticized the administration's efforts to bring back coal.
"The 19th century called, and it wants its fuel source back," said Manish Bapna, president of the Natural Resources Defense Council. "The Trump administration is using our tax dollars to prop up the nation's dirtiest, least efficient power plants."
"The rest of us are left to pay the price: more heart disease and asthma attacks, higher utility bills, and more frequent unnatural disasters," Mr. Bapna added.
The new initiative by the Pentagon could provide further support to the coal industry.
There are more than 40 coal-burning plants within 100 miles of military installations around the country, said Michelle Bloodworth, the president of America's Power, a coal industry trade group. Plants that sign long-term contracts with the Pentagon would gain some financial certainty that would allow their owners to invest in them, she said. It would also provide a steadier source of demand for coal mines.
"These long-term contracts will be a major aid to providing long-term certainty," said Ms. Bloodworth. "It will very much keep the coal supply chain healthy."
The Biden administration had previously directed federal agencies to buy more electricity from emissions-free sources such as wind, solar and nuclear power in an effort to tackle climate change and transition the country away from fossil fuels. Mr. Trump has repealed that order.
There are limits to how much the military alone can do to support the coal industry, said Douglas Giuffre, who leads U.S. power and renewables research for S&P Global Energy. Even if the Defense Department got all of its electricity from coal, it would only need about 3 percent of the nation's coal power capacity, he estimated. But if the Pentagon targeted its support at the subset of coal plants that were otherwise expected to retire, that could have a bigger impact, he said.
The Trump administration's efforts to rescue coal have been aided by a surge in electricity demand nationwide driven by a boom in data centers. Electric utilities have already delayed the planned retirements of more than 58 coal-burning units at 32 power plants since 2022, either to help meet rising demand for electricity or because of reliability concerns, according to data from America's Power.
More utilities could end up reconsidering plant retirements now that the Trump administration is relaxing pollution rules. One Biden-era climate change regulation, for instance, would have essentially forced all coal plants to close by 2039 unless they took costly steps to capture and bury their planet-warming carbon emissions. The E.P.A. is now working to repeal that rule.
"The fact that they are working to redo those regulations will have a large impact," Ms. Bloodworth said. Many utilities, she said, had been deterred from investing in their coal plants because of the risk that they would soon have to close.
Administration officials say that keeping coal plants open is necessary to avoid blackouts and meet rising energy needs. They point out that coal plants significantly ramped up their output during the bitter cold last month when wind turbines and solar panels were often producing relatively little power.
"When large parts of our country were hit with winter storms, it was coal that kept the power on and it was coal that never was bothered by cold weather, warm weather, it's never bothered by anything, it just keeps on chugging, right?" Mr. Trump said.
Critics have countered that the administration's moves to support coal could drive up electricity costs by propping up aging, expensive plants and preventing utilities from investing in newer, lower-cost replacements.
Last week, the owners of a coal plant in Craig, Colo., challenged the Energy Department's efforts to use emergency authority to keep the unit open past its retirement date. In regulatory filings, the owners said the coal unit is not needed for reliability and is currently broken, and that the cost of repairing it will fall on ratepayers.
"We have planned for the retirement of this resource for over a decade," said Jason Frisbie, chief executive of Platte River Power Authority, one of the plant's owners. "While Platte River will continue to comply with federal law, we disagree with the need to keep the plant open."
It remains to be seen whether the administration can permanently lift up the fortunes of the coal industry or merely stave off its decline for a few years.
"One big problem in the United States is that these coal plants aren't getting any younger, and the average age is well over 40," said Brendan Pierpont, director of electricity at Energy Innovation, an energy and climate policy research group. "The costs of maintenance are rising, their reliability is declining, and there's only so far you can push that out before these issues really start to bite."
Coal mining jobs also continue to dwindle. Roughly 40,000 people are employed in the coal mining industry today, down from about 173,000 in 1985, as much of mining is increasingly automated.
Repealing environmental rules could improve the economic fortunes of some existing plants and mines, Mr. Pierpoint said, but it's not clear that utilities are willing to invest billions of dollars in building new coal plants given the possibility that pollution regulations could be reimposed in the future.
"It goes back to risk," he said. "Are you going back to put a lot of capital into a technology where the long-term fundamentals are pretty shaky?"

As Gov. Kathy Hochul of New York outlined her priorities for the coming year in her annual State of the State address on Tuesday, she drew upon Mayor Zohran Mamdani's message of affordability and vowed to fend off attacks from the Trump administration.
The 47-minute, 47-second speech also offered a preview of the goals she will try to meet and the political constituencies she must please as she faces a contested primary and general election this year.
Here are eight takeaways from Ms. Hochul's fifth State of the State address:
Bills, bills, bills.
No, not the Buffalo ones with helmets - the kind that add to New Yorkers' financial concerns.

Lowering utility bills will be a key element of Ms. Hochul's re-election strategy as she fends off accusations from Republicans that the state has become too expensive on her watch.
As part of that effort, she wants to put $50 million toward helping New Yorkers make their homes more efficient. She also proposed a change to auto insurance that would bring down rates by capping payouts for drivers who are breaking the law.
But probably her most transformative proposal was released last week: a pitch to eventually provide free, universally available child care. "This plan will ultimately deliver universal child care for every single family in New York. Full stop," Ms. Hochul said on Tuesday.
As part of the plan, the state would spend an additional $1.7 billion to expand coverage to 100,000 children in the coming year, bringing the state's total child care investment to $4.5 billion. Experts say that the cost for a statewide program would be $12 billion to $15 billion.
Mamdani's agenda is not Hochul's agenda.
Even as she embraced portions of the affordability agenda of Mr. Mamdani, New York City's new mayor, Ms. Hochul also underscored the limits of their partnership. She made no mention of Mr. Mamdani's goal of making the city's 345 bus routes free, which could cost the state's Metropolitan Transportation Authority close to $1 billion a year in lost fare revenue.
Such a subsidy would likely require Ms. Hochul to raise taxes, which she has steadfastly opposed.
Ms. Hochul did not mention taxes, or how she would pay for her vision. New Yorkers will get a better sense of how the governor plans to fund her proposals after the budget presentation next week.
No protesting within 25 feet of houses of worship.
Jewish voters have been profoundly divided on a number of fronts, particularly as Mr. Mamdani, a staunch critic of Israel's treatment of Palestinians, has risen to prominence. Many have expressed unease about their safety amid a rise of antisemitic episodes.
While Mr. Mamdani has said he will defend Jewish New Yorkers from antisemitism, many Jewish residents have not been persuaded and have looked to Ms. Hochul for support.
Ms. Hochul said she intended to support banning protesters from demonstrating within 25 feet of houses of worship and health care facilities. The move comes after a number of recent contentious episodes outside synagogues that have attracted attention.
Her outreach to Jews is not new. But her emphasis on a community that includes many members who feel estranged from New York City's top leader was notable.
Mr. Mamdani did not applaud Ms. Hochul's mention of this proposal, and said afterward that he wanted the city's Law Department to review the legality of the plan before deciding whether he supported it.
State Assemblyman Micah Lasher, a Democrat who has been a proponent of the measure, said that it was "not a cure-all for the antisemitism that we're seeing with disturbing frequency, but it's a meaningful step the state can take."
 "This is a proposal that balances the right to exercise free speech with the reasonable goal of ensuring New Yorkers can walk into a shul without having to run a gantlet," Mr. Lasher added.

Hochul wants to protect children.
The governor has been eager to grapple with how new and fast-changing technologies are seeping into the lives of New Yorkers. Ms. Hochul has banned cellphones in schools and regulated artificial intelligence, among other efforts, to protect New Yorkers - particularly children - from the harms of these technologies.
Her remarks on Tuesday built on this effort. Ms. Hochul called for new privacy standards that would make it harder for strangers to view, tag or message minors on gaming and social media platforms. She also said she wanted to prohibit campaigns from spreading A.I.-generated images of people, including opposing political candidates, without their consent in the 90 days before an election.
New York is going nuclear.
Even as activists champion new wind and solar projects across the state, Ms. Hochul has taken a more cautious stance. Amid warnings about rising costs and reliability challenges, she has angered environmental advocates with her recent moves to permit new natural gas pipelines in the state.
Ms. Hochul on Tuesday suggested that New York would lead "the race to harness safe and reliable advanced nuclear energy to power homes and businesses with zero-emission electricity for generations to come."
Few nuclear facilities have been constructed over the past decade, in large part because of concerns about cost and the disposal of nuclear materials. On Tuesday, protesters gathered in Albany to oppose the governor's proposal, which they said was dangerous and irresponsible.

Countries across Asia are bracing for a complete cutoff in coming days of Middle Eastern liquefied natural gas, a fuel that underpins power generation and industrial output across much of the region.
The blockade of the Strait of Hormuz as well as repeated strikes on the world's largest L.N.G. export complex in Qatar have knocked roughly 28 million tons of supply from the market this year. That represents nearly the entire global supply growth forecast for 2026. It could take years for the flow of L.N.G. from the Mideast to return to prewar levels.
"It's a significant tightening of the market - we're talking reduced production until the end of the decade," said Henning Gloystein, managing director for energy at Eurasia Group, a political risk research firm. In Asia, in the next week, "that's when the actual impact, the physical impact, of nondelivery will begin to happen," he said.
Until now, Asia has been shielded by a buffer of cargoes from the Persian Gulf already at sea before the strait's closing. But the last of those ships will arrive within the next few days. That will leave Asia, which buys about 90 percent of the L.N.G. that the Middle East produces, bracing for a gap between supply and how much it needs. That gap will show little sign of easing until at least 2028, when a wave of U.S. gas production is expected to bring new volumes.
Asia's biggest economies - China, Japan, India and South Korea - and emerging markets like Vietnam and Thailand all rely significantly on L.N.G. for power. This unexpected disruption threatens the region's industrial output and may undermine its willingness in the future to rely on the fuel to power its growing energy needs.
Signs of a squeeze are already appearing. Countries across Asia that can are switching to oil- and coal-powered electricity generation and in some cases aggressively curtailing consumption. These measures are likely to intensify as the war's disruption of energy flows drags on, energy experts say.
Switching Fuels
"Basically, when there's less supply in the market, that means demand will need to come down," said Daniel Toleman, a research director for global L.N.G. at the energy consultant Wood Mackenzie. As a first resort, "what you're going to see is countries switching to other fuels wherever is possible."
Some nations with ample coal-fired power plants can pivot relatively swiftly. A Wood Mackenzie analysis shows that in South Korea, which imports almost a fifth of its L.N.G. from the Middle East, increasing use of its coal plants could allow it to fill its entire gas gap until summer. In Japan, coal could offset up to 70 percent of gas-fired power generation.
This retreat to coal power - which releases roughly twice as much carbon dioxide into the atmosphere as natural gas - risks derailing decarbonization timelines and climate goals. But in the interest of securing immediate industrial survival, many countries are plowing ahead.
In response to energy-supply disruptions, the South Korean government announced plans to lift its cap on coal-fired power plant use that had been in place to help protect air quality. Both Seoul and Tokyo have also indicated they would take steps to bolster nuclear power generation.
India is another major importer of Middle Eastern L.N.G. that is likely to pivot significantly to coal, according to Wood Mackenzie. It has vast domestic reserves, and since the outbreak of the war, New Delhi has issued directives to maximize coal-fired output, ordering coal plants to operate at full capacity for three months starting in April.

China likewise possesses huge domestic coal reserves, which, alongside gas piped in from Russia and a world-leading wind and solar fleet tied to the world's largest energy storage network, have shielded the country from the worst of the L.N.G. supply shocks.
Other governments in the region have fewer options. Taiwan, which draws roughly 30 percent of its L.N.G. through contracts with Qatar, has retired much of its coal operations in recent years, and its nuclear capacity has been phased out. A move to bring back mothballed coal plants would be time consuming and expensive.
Still, for wealthier economies in Northeast Asia, the crisis will be expensive but probably more manageable because they can bid competitively for gas on the spot market, a venue for immediate L.N.G. deliveries from the United States and elsewhere at market prices.
"Because they're richer, they can resolve this with money," Eurasia Group's Mr. Gloystein said. Bigger economies like Japan, when in need, can snap up expensive cargoes from the spot market. "That will, of course, come at the expense of poorer countries," he said.
Curtailing Use
In South and Southeast Asia, for countries like Pakistan and Bangladesh, "it's going to be more of a story of curtailments," Mr. Toleman of Wood Mackenzie said. In that region, "countries really have to choose between the energy costs and effectively paying to import high-priced L.N.G. or slowing the economy and cutting gas demand."
The industrial toll is mounting. Sectors such as glass, steel and ceramics require high-temperature furnaces that run almost exclusively on gas. Fertilizer production requires natural gas as a primary ingredient for ammonia, making these plants among the first to shutter when supply vanishes.
Steel and fertilizer operations have been affected in Vietnam. In India and Pakistan, a shortage of liquefied petroleum gas has left millions unable to cook daily meals, forcing the closing of thousands of small businesses and restaurants.
Some governments are already starting to ration. The Philippines, which recently declared a national emergency because of surging fuel prices, has experimented with shortened workweeks, and Pakistan has closed schools to conserve energy. In India, gas distributors have reduced supply to one of the world's largest centers for manufacturing ceramics, to give priority to residential needs.
The crisis arrives at a precarious moment in particular for Southeast Asia, which has seen a manufacturing boom in recent years as companies have adopted strategies to shift supply chains outside China. In Vietnam, which was already struggling to meet booming power demand, the gas shortage is a major headwind.
"The only way out, if you can't fuel-switch, is pay or reduce consumption," Mr. Gloystein said. In regions like Southeast Asia, curtailment activity is likely to continue for years. Manufacturers in the region are "going to have to slow their investment and probably even shut down some factories," he said. "It's going to really hurt their industrial base."
No Return to Normal
The longer-term question is whether countries that learn to live with less L.N.G. in the coming months and years will choose to return to a fuel that has recently experienced two major supply disruptions - first during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and now because of the war in the Middle East.
In Asia, L.N.G. has long been marketed as a "bridge fuel" - cleaner than coal, more reliable than renewables and capable of powering a region where, by 2050, energy demand is set to roughly double. Before the outbreak of the war in the Middle East, L.N.G. demand in Asia was also forecast to roughly double by midcentury.
Those projections were set to give rise to a spree of new gas plants and import terminals across the region.
Now, "the entire concept of L.N.G. being a reliable fuel is undermined," Mr. Gloystein said. "It's basically out the window because of the second serious natural gas crunch in five years." The crisis is likely to spur more use of alternatives seen as less vulnerable to geopolitical shocks, like renewable energy and nuclear power, he added.
For importers of L.N.G., the fundamental calculation has changed, Mr. Gloystein said. "Anybody at the moment who's in a country or company that has plans to do gas-fired power stations is going to have to review these," he said. "There's going to be no return to normal even if the war ends."

Even if the Strait of Hormuz opens again, energy executives and analysts say the industry will no longer be able to count on it as it used to. For the strait, there is no going back to normal.
Countries across the region are exploring building, expanding or rehabilitating infrastructure that would bypass the strait.
And nations that import fuel from the region are racing to secure oil and gas from elsewhere, putting conservation measures in place and turning to alternatives like coal. Those strategies are likely to shift over time. Today's coal use may give way to greater investment in solar power and nuclear energy, for example.
No matter what happens next, Iran will not forget how easy it is to strangle shipping through the strait, meaning that energy companies and consumers must prepare for a very different future.

To stem the current energy crisis, Saudi Arabia and the Emirates have rerouted substantial portions of the oil they produce to ports away from the Strait of Hormuz, via pipelines built years ago in preparation for a crisis. Iraq also recently started sending a small amount of oil to Turkey in a pipeline that has slid in and out of service for years because of political and armed conflict.
More than seven million barrels of oil are being shipped out of the Persian Gulf each day on one of those routes, up from fewer than four million barrels a day before the war, according to the International Energy Agency.
But that is a fraction of the 20 million barrels of oil that traveled through the strait daily before the war. And pipelines are doing nothing for geographically isolated countries like Kuwait and Qatar. They are also of little use for transporting aluminum, fertilizer and other goods.
For those reasons, not to mention geopolitical objectives, reopening the strait remains very important. The strait's centrality is why international oil prices plunged 9 percent on Friday, to their lowest levels since the second week of the war, after Iran's foreign minister said the strait would be "completely open."
But Tehran reversed course the next day, after President Trump made clear that U.S. forces would keep blockading vessels traveling to and from Iranian ports. The United States later seized an Iranian-flagged cargo ship that Mr. Trump said had tried to get around the U.S. blockade.
That back-and-forth reinforced the idea that free passage through the strait can be halted by any world power determined to do so.
"The Strait of Hormuz will be less important in 2030 or 2035 than it was in January," said Elliott Abrams, who served as a special representative for Iran and Venezuela during the first Trump administration. "People will find alternatives."
Some simpler options include expanding existing pipelines, storage capacity and ports in Saudi Arabia and the Emirates. But that would solve only a portion of the problem. Most Gulf countries do not have the benefit of access to another coast that lies outside the strait.
Iraq, which is among those without another coast, has floated building a new pipeline to the Mediterranean Sea by way of Syria.
Political conflict often stymied such cross-border projects in the past. A pipeline from Iraq through Saudi Arabia to the Red Sea was built in the 1980s. But Saudi Arabia shut it down in 1990 after Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, invaded Kuwait.
Now, with few working alternatives, last month Iraq was forced to shut the production of an estimated three million barrels a day of oil, according to the I.E.A.
"You can draw beautiful lines on the map," said Robin Mills, chief executive of Qamar Energy, a consulting firm based in Dubai in the Emirates. "To try to make it happen in reality is something else."
Mr. Jafar, the Emirati businessman and special envoy, expressed optimism that the war might inspire the kind of regional cooperation that had previously been elusive.
"There's nothing like both a sense of urgency and an imperative to decouple from this choke point for us to see these sorts of things coming together," Mr. Jafar said. "It's not impossible, far from it."
This kind of infrastructure would most likely cost billions of dollars - and potentially tens of billions for larger projects. That said, crises like the one the world is experiencing are expensive, too.
"One or two months of a disruption like this, and it pays for itself," Mr. Mills said, referring to smaller projects like expanding existing alternatives.
Of course, no alternative would be fail-safe, as Iran has demonstrated by attacking energy assets throughout the region. But having more options makes it harder for countries to choke off the supply of energy from the region.
Energy importers are also moving quickly to diversify away from the Persian Gulf, whether by buying more fuel from the United States or making plans to restart nuclear power plants. Those trends are likely to be sticky, energy experts say. They could give an upper hand to oil and gas producers that are not at the mercy of maritime choke points and accelerate the transition away from oil and gas.
But remaking energy trading routes to prioritize resilience - rather than efficiency - will be expensive. Such investments will take time and are likely to raise energy prices for consumers, said Spencer Dale, who until recently was the chief economist of the London-based oil company BP.
"The world is just now more uncertain, more vulnerable than it was before," said Mr. Dale, now a visiting professor at the London School of Economics and Political Science. The rational response is to compensate by making the energy system more resilient to geopolitical upheaval, he said. "But that all comes at a cost."

More than half a century after the United States put humans on the moon, it is once again locked in a space race. This one is with China.
NASA sent astronauts on a lunar flyby on Wednesday, a milestone toward grander ambitions. Both the United States and China want to build outposts around the moon's south pole and hope to tap frozen water, hydrogen and helium there. Both countries plan to build nuclear reactors to power lunar bases from which they can launch missions into deep space.
It is a new frontier, and whoever gets there first will have a big say in setting the rules.
NASA's program, known as Artemis, has hit repeated snags. The United States wants to be back on the moon by 2028, two years ahead of China's target, but even NASA acknowledges that it may not win.
"They may be early," Jared Isaacman, the NASA administrator, said last week. "And recent history suggests we might be late."
China is pursuing its lunar ambitions with a singular, formidable focus. Its program has several advantages over its American rivals.
Experts say China's edge lies in its centralized control, which allows it to plan and fund projects for decades at a time. Its robotic space missions have already gone where the United States has not.
China is the only nation to land on and retrieve samples from the far side of the moon, the hemisphere that always faces away from Earth. This summer, China's seventh robotic mission, Chang'e 7, will explore the lunar south pole.

It helps China that its immediate ambition is leaner. Chinese astronauts plan to land on the relatively accessible near side of the moon. That's where Neil Armstrong took "one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind" in 1969.
American astronauts are aiming for the moon's south pole.
A recent program overhaul could speed Artemis along. The new plan includes more launches to test components, gain confidence and lower risks, Mr. Isaacman said. After returning astronauts to the moon, NASA plans to launch missions every six months and sustain a presence there.
 "This time the goal is not flags and footprints," Mr. Isaacman said. "This time the goal is to stay."
China is pursuing similar goals through two programs that will likely merge: Crewed missions under the military's purview, and civilian robotic missions.
Both programs rely on components built mainly by the China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, an enterprise that combines industry and military expertise. That means they share key technologies.
NASA relies more heavily on private vendors.
Yuqi Qian, a lunar geologist at the University of Hong Kong who works on China's lunar missions, said that because China's first crewed mission is treading some of the same ground covered by Apollo missions long ago, scientists have more freedom to experiment. Chinese exploration programs will keep moving at a cadence set years earlier, regardless of what Artemis does, he said.
"There is actually no burden on the Chinese side," Dr. Qian said in an interview. "We are doing this more freely."
 "I don't think China regards this as a race," he added.
Here's what we know about China's crewed lunar mission, and how its components compare to their NASA counterparts.
China plans to use a government-built rocket, the Long March 10, for the moon landing. It is about as tall as a 30-story building and has seven engines at its base, the section known as the first stage.
In initial tests, Chinese scientists fired up the rocket's engines while it was tethered in place. Then, in February, they fired five of the seven engines and launched the first stage to a height of just over 65 miles.
It splashed down in the sea, where scientists retrieved it.
China is behind the United States on rocket technology, a gap that has slowed its bid to compete with SpaceX's Starlink satellite network in low-earth orbit. China does not have a reusable rocket to match SpaceX's Falcon 9.
Parts of the Long March 10 may eventually become reusable, but that matters less for lunar missions, which are less frequent than launches to put satellites in orbit.

The American launcher - the Space Launch System - is a marked improvement on the system that first sent astronauts to the moon. It is a powerful and complicated rocket cobbled together from components made by NASA and multiple contractors.
The rocket has not been used many times, but on Wednesday, it blasted off for its first crewed mission against a backdrop of a clear blue sky. It was a big win for NASA and more frequent launches in the new Artemis plan are expected to work out any remaining kinks.
"It's a big celebration in launch control for the rocket guys," Amit Kshatriya, the NASA associate administrator, said after the launch.
 "The rocket guys can go out and play now," he said.
China is developing a new spacecraft called the Mengzhou or "Dream Boat" that can carry up to seven astronauts. It is designed for both lunar missions and trips to the Chinese space station, about 280 miles above Earth.
The spacecraft will carry astronauts to a lunar orbit. Once there, it will rendezvous with a lander that will take the astronauts to the moon's surface. China is planning to conduct the moon mission with two launches, in part because it does not have a big enough launcher.
China will test the Dream Boat's ability to rendezvous and dock with the Chinese space station later this year. Similar in-orbit meet-ups have already been tested in robotic missions to the moon.
Dream Boat passed its most recent test, in February, when it demonstrated its ability to abort within the first minutes of a launch. The spacecraft successfully detached from a rocket under maximum pressure conditions, according to government media.
The American spacecraft, Orion, was first tested in 2014 and is farther along in its development. Orion carried the four astronauts on the Artemis II mission on Wednesday. NASA will test its life support and environmental control systems during this mission.
Anyone who has watched footage of the Apollo 11 mission will remember the lander - a scientific wonder that looked like a janky assemblage of golden foil and flimsy metal.
China's version of the lunar lander, called Lanyue or "Embracing the Moon," incorporates decades of improvements.
According to the mission design, after the astronauts hop aboard in orbit, the lander will head to the lunar surface. There, it will serve them as a temporary home, data center and energy source.
For the astronauts' return, the lander will take off and rendezvous with the spacecraft in the moon's orbit .
China tested a prototype in August, navigating to a surface that was built to imitate the moon's craters and bumps.
The U.S. does not have a lander yet, in part because of the complexity of its planned mission. SpaceX is developing its version, Starship, and will test it again in April. Blue Origin is developing another lander.
NASA plans to launch a mission called Artemis III next year that will test the landers' operation closer to Earth. The agency will go with whichever lander is ready first, according to Lori Glaze, a NASA official.
Wangyu suits will be slimmer versions of the spacesuits used on the Chinese space station. They will have an anti-glare visor, a camera on each side of the helmet and a control consol on the chest.
The suits' design will echo traditional armor to make the astronauts look "more spirited and imposing," one official told government media. The spacesuits are expected to undergo more testing this year.
The United States will upgrade its suits to make them more flexible and provide greater protection from the harsh environment on the moon. NASA has contracted for spacesuits that can support astronauts for up to eight hours outside their vehicle.

A proposal to build an artificial intelligence data center between Buffalo and Rochester, N.Y., is facing opposition from critics, including residents, who say they fear that the sprawling center's droning supercomputers will disturb Indigenous communities and animal life, strain the power grid and raise utility rates.
The $19.4 billion data center, to be constructed in the town of Alabama in rural Genesee County, would require 500 megawatts of electricity, according to the proposal, equivalent to 20 percent of the electricity generated daily by the nearby Niagara Falls hydropower plant.
The 2.2-million-square-foot complex would also be constructed roughly a mile from the territorial home of the Tonawanda Seneca Nation and situated close to the Iroquois National Wildlife Refuge and several smaller animal preserves.
"I can't think of one good reason for it," said Arthur Barnes, a resident of Shelby, a town just north of Alabama, who was one of about 60 people who attended an informational meeting on the data center last month at the Alabama Fire Hall.
Like many attendees, he wore a button with a line through the words "STAMP project," the center's informal name. The complex would be built at the Science, Technology and Advanced Manufacturing Park - or STAMP - in Alabama.
"I have been going to the rez for over 50 years, and it's pristine," ??????Mr. Barnes, 68, said, speaking of the Tonawanda Seneca reservation. "Of all the places to put something like this, did they have to put it right next to a sovereign nation and a national wildlife refuge?"
???America's A.I. boom, driven by tech giants like Meta, Google and Microsoft, has created a need for data centers across the country that can support the technology involved. But the centers, many of them slated to be built in rural communities like Alabama, are being met with increasing resistance from local residents concerned about the environment, the noise and rising electricity bills, among other issues.
Mark Masse, the president and chief executive of the Genesee County Economic Development Center, the industrial development agency advancing ??????????the STAMP project, said that a nondisclosure agreement prevented it from releasing the name of the tech company that would operate the center.
The project's developer, the Dallas-based Stream Data Centers, expects construction to start this year, with basic operations at the complex beginning in 2027. The center would not be fully up and running until 2030.
???Before work can begin, Alabama's Planning Board has to ????approve the project and it must receive a state environmental review. The center's opponents are also considering a lawsuit, which could delay it or stop it entirely.
Among opponents' concerns are the subsidies luring Stream to New York. The company, owned by the private equity firm Apollo Global Management - which in September 2025 reported assets of $449.5 billion - would receive $1.4 billion in tax subsidies. That's an average of $11.2 million for each of the center's 125 anticipated employees, each of whom would likely earn an average of $80,000 a year.
Mr. Masse said the subsidies were necessary to ensure that New York remained competitive with other states. "We don't look at the calculation of benefits per job," Mr. Masse said, noting that the project was expected to create over 1,000 construction positions.
The possibility that the data center's presence will increase utility rates is also raising alarms.
The three states with the nation's highest concentration of such data centers - Illinois, Virginia and Ohio - saw their electricity bills increase twice as much or more than the national average in August 2025 as compared with the ????same month in 2024, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Prices rose 16 percent in Illinois, 13 percent in Virginia and 12 percent in Ohio.
Mayor Sean Ryan of Buffalo believes New York residents can expect a similar increase if the STAMP project moves forward. "In addition to massive tax subsidies, the energy usage is going to impact every ratepayer in New York State," he said.
If the project is built, the county's Economic Development Center stands to receive $145 million in fees. That money, Mr. Masse said, would be used in part to develop more business parks in the area and to upgrade the wastewater treatment plant in nearby Oakfield, so that it can handle the estimated 20,000 gallons of water to be used daily by the center. Genesee County, Alabama and the local school district would also receive a combined $285 million over the course of STAMP's 30-year contract with Stream, ??????while the county and state would also split an estimated $27 million in annual sales tax revenue generated by the center's electricity usage.
Earl La Grou, an Alabama resident and a former owner of farm-equipment dealerships, said the project had a lot to offer, in part because some of the funds the town received would be used to lower property taxes.
"The overall financial benefit to the community, town and county are tremendous," Mr. La Grou, 61, said. "The farming community will also benefit by being able to budget based on knowing what their taxes will be, and ??how much they will go down."
The fact that the development agency is overseeing the state-required environmental review of the project is another flashpoint. Critics say the agency's need to find tenants for STAMP and the fees it stands to gain from them have created a conflict of interest. In January, nearby Orleans County joined the Sierra Club and the Tonawanda Seneca Nation in requesting, unsuccessfully, that the State Department of Environmental Conservation oversee the review instead.
Grandell Logan, a Tonawanda Seneca spokesman, said the project threatened the environment and the Indigenous community's way of life. "The noise from this data center alone will irrevocably change the soundscape of the area," he said.
The center would also undermine the state's legally mandated efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and preserve land, said Diane Ciurczak of the Sierra Club.
Mr. Masse, however, said there were environmental misperceptions about the project. "I think people go on the internet and think all data centers are exactly the same," he said.
He said that the rooftop air-conditioning units used to cool the center's data servers would lower its water usage, and that a study by the New York Independent System Operator, which manages the state's power system, had found that the project would not negatively affect the electric grid.
Mr. Masse also said that ??????????the noise produced by the center, while constant, would generally not exceed 65 decibels, similar to the volume of an air-conditioning unit. However, a Sierra Club-funded analysis by the Noise Pollution Clearinghouse, a nonprofit advocacy group based in Vermont, ????found that the STAMP proposal had not provided enough information for the organization to accurately assess the center's noise level.
Last month, Gov. Kathy Hochul of New York called for a new nuclear power plant to help meet the state's growing energy demands, and for the state's other data centers - there are facilities, ????either proposed or operating, in 28 counties - to pay their "fair share" of taxes and costs, including for grid updates and water and energy use.
"Unlike other sectors, data centers consume massive amounts of finite resources and place an unprecedented strain on the electric grid without creating many jobs in the process," the governor's office said in a statement.
Tyson Slocum, the energy program director at Public Citizen, a nonprofit consumer advocacy organization, said that the STAMP project highlighted the need for a deeper discussion about the increasing role of A.I. and data centers in people's lives.
???????"What has been missing from the discussion over data centers is what is in the public interest," Mr. Slocum said.

Bombs are exploding in Iran and the Middle East, but the fallout is rattling households and businesses in neighborhoods all over the globe.
In Kansas, home buyers saw 30-year mortgage rates edge above 6 percent this week. In Western India, families mourning the death of a loved one discovered that gas-fired crematories had been temporarily closed.

In Hanoi, Vietnam, gas station owners posted "sold out" signs. In Kenya, tea growers and traders worried their exports to Iran would rot on the dock. And across the United States, Canada, Europe, Britain and Mexico, farmers blanched at the surge in fertilizer costs.
The widening war in Iran has delivered a stunning punch to a worldwide economy that has already been walloped by a breakdown of the international trading order, war in Ukraine and President Trump's chaotic policymaking.
"This really is the big one," David Goldwyn, a former U.S. diplomat and U.S. Energy Department official, said of the shutdown of the Strait of Hormuz, the world's most important choke point for oil. It is the emergency scenario everyone feared, he said.
Cargo deliveries have been stranded, shipping charges have increased and insurance premiums have skyrocketed. Yes, the price of gas at the pump is affected. But so is the price of food, medicine, airplane tickets, electricity, cooking oil, semiconductors and more.
A drawn-out war between the United States and Iran could have "catastrophic consequences" for the world's oil market and the global economy, Amin Nasser, chief executive of Saudi Aramco, the world's largest oil and gas company, warned this week.
Yet even if the war, which began on Feb. 28 when the United States and Israel struck Iran, wraps up relatively quickly, this latest upheaval is sending consumers, workers and employers on another unnerving and unpredictable ride.
It's not just that small business owners and corporate executives must once again re-evaluate their supply chains, manage additional price increases and track shifting restrictions on who they can do business with. Or that the added uncertainty undermines confidence, making consumers reluctant to spend and businesses reluctant to invest.
It's that this remapping of power dynamics in the Middle East could set off a string of consequences whose full force might not be known for months or years.
Meg Jacobs, the author of "Panic at the Pump: The Energy Crisis and The Transformation of American Politics in the 1970s," pointed out that prices didn't immediately go back down after the oil embargo in 1973 and 1974. They remained high for the rest of the decade.
The supply situation is completely different today, with many more producers, Ms. Jacobs emphasized. But the crisis that the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries created with its embargo set off a chain of events that these oil producers never envisioned.
The oil shock prompted other countries, most significantly the United States, to conserve energy and develop fuel-efficient cars and their own oil and natural gas industries. Ultimately, the Arab countries' monopolistic stranglehold was broken. Oil prices ended up collapsing in 1986.
Today's actions in Iran and the surrounding region may similarly have consequences that are both unexpected and far-reaching.

Ms. Jacobs, for example, pointed to the likelihood of an emboldened and strengthened Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin. This week Mr. Trump eased some of the restrictions on Russian oil exports that had been imposed to pressure Mr. Putin over the war in Ukraine.
Higher oil prices will boost Russia's beleaguered economy and war machine. And Mr. Putin has taken the opportunity to taunt European leaders who supported sanctions on Russian energy after the invasion of Ukraine.
The crisis is also a potent reminder of the persistent vulnerabilities around critical supply chains. The Covid-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine caused national leaders all over the world to talk about the need to prioritize resilience and security.
The U.S.- Israeli war in Iran, though, once again highlights how disruptions in the global trading system can still inflict severe economic pain.
Europeans only recently dug out of their deep dependency on Russian gas and oil. For them, the timing of this energy squeeze could hardly be worse. Producers, still reeling from the impact of the tariffs, must now contend with higher energy costs. That will be a blow to countries like Germany with large, energy-hungry chemical, pharmaceutical and auto industries.
With gas storage at low levels, there's also likely to be some "panic refilling" in Europe that could push against price drops over the next six months or so, Mr. Goldwyn, the former energy department official, said.
Rising oil prices do have the potential to increase interest in alternative energy sources like solar, wind and nuclear power, Mr. Goldwyn added.
Political support, though, is critical to developing any of these resources. And at least in the United States, Mr. Trump's hostility to renewable energy remains fierce.
Asian economies are even more exposed. They, too, are dependent on energy imports. In addition, poor and middle-income countries are subject to the vagaries of currency exchange rates. And when the dollar or euro strengthens, all their imports suddenly become more expensive.
Central bankers around the world face a difficult combination of circumstances. The United States has a stronger economy than many other countries. Nonetheless, its Federal Reserve confronts the same questions that are confounding other central bankers. Do they raise interest rates to head off a revival of inflation as energy prices spike, or lower rates as labor markets are weakening and growth is slowing?
Elevated rates will also keep borrowing costs high at a time when rich and poor countries are facing record levels of debt. That means more money that might have been used for health care, roads, housing or education instead will go to interest payments on debt.
Carsten Brzeski, an economist at the Dutch bank ING, noted that tech companies, especially those specializing in artificial intelligence, are highly sensitive to interest rate changes. A small handful of these companies have been the main drivers of growth in the U.S. economy - not to mention lofty stock valuations. "It could lead to the sharp correction in stock markets," he said.
Mr. Trump's rationale for the attacks and his objectives have shifted from one day to the next. But the decision to wage war on Iran undercuts the recently popular idea that the world was neatly breaking down into great power spheres of influence.
Mr. Trump's toppling of Venezuela's president, Nicolás Maduro, seizure of its oil and declaration of a "Donroe Doctrine" staked a claim for hegemony in North and South America.
But the war in Iran shows that Mr. Trump still sees the United States as a superpower with global reach and global interests. And that he is willing to use military force to achieve both political and economic aims.
"And that matters for the economy," said Neil Shearing, group chief economist at Capital Economics, as Washington moves to increasingly direct the flow of goods, services and money around the globe.

President Trump's sweeping tax law last year eliminated most federal support for wind and solar energy, electric vehicles and other clean technologies. Now, a group of wealthy investors is coming after its architects, trying to prove that green energy knows how to play hardball politics.
Their first target is Chip Roy, a Republican representative from Texas who led the push to kill subsidies for clean tech in the One Big Beautiful Bill Act. The investors, who include Chris Larsen, the billionaire co-founder of the cryptocurrency platform Ripple, are pouring money into defeating Mr. Roy's campaign for attorney general in Texas.
Clean energy backers have already bought $650,000 of TV ads bashing Roy, which helped force him into a primary runoff this month. They plan to announce this week that they'll put another $500,000 into the runoff and develop a list of other races they'll engage with this fall, too.
Mr. Roy's top Republican campaign rival, Mayes Middleton, is no friend to renewables: A Texas state senator, he has introduced bills to restrict wind and solar power. But the clean tech executives said they weren't worried that they might help elect someone equally antagonistic.
They're aiming for payback.
"You've got to have some fear that if you vote against the clean energy industry, you may pay a political price," said Michael Brune, a former head of the Sierra Club who now serves as chief executive of the Clean Break Fund, a climate investment group backed by Mr. Larsen, who has contributed $500,000 to the effort.
Mr. Roy acknowledged in a telephone interview that the clean energy spending had an impact in the primary. But he said he took their opposition as a "badge of honor" and promised to try to hurt the industry even more.
"You want to come after me? Then I'm taking two of your guys," Mr. Roy said. "We got a good chunk of your subsidies removed last year. Just wait until the next go-round."
Last year was brutal for clean energy. Mr. Trump's tax law, which Republicans muscled through on party-line votes, dismantled more than $600 billion in tax credits and incentives for electric vehicles, solar and wind projects. The Trump administration also stalled federal approvals for solar and wind and fought to halt five offshore wind farms that were already under construction. This week, officials announced they would pay nearly $1 billion to terminate two offshore wind leases.
But some executives, particularly in the solar industry, said they were done licking their wounds and have started to go on the offensive.
Separately, a group of solar companies formed a coalition called American Energy First and commissioned a poll by Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump's longtime adviser. That survey found that 75 percent of Trump voters supported expanding U.S. solar energy, garnering a headline in Breitbart, a right-wing news outlet.
The solar coalition is also amplifying conservatives who have written recently about the benefits of clean energy, such as Newt Gingrich, the Republican former House speaker and an informal Trump adviser, and Katie Miller, a former administration official who is also married to Stephen Miller, Mr. Trump's deputy chief of staff.
"Solar energy is the energy of the future," Ms. Miller posted on X in February.
Ms. Miller briefly worked as a top staff member for Elon Musk's Department of Government Efficiency. Mr. Musk has supported solar energy for years, and Tesla recently announced plans to manufacture 100 gigawatts of solar panels annually by 2028. That is more than twice as many as the entire country installed last year. Ms. Miller said her posts were unrelated to Tesla's efforts and that no one had paid or encouraged her to write them.
 "My X feed is just my unfiltered thoughts to the public," she said in an interview, adding that she has not tried to influence Trump officials on clean energy.
"My husband and I did have a conversation about how I felt on solar energy, but at no point did I ever ask him, or anybody in the administration, to take a different perspective than what they already have on this," Ms. Miller said. "It's not my place."
Solar panels sit on black and yellow metal platforms in a factory.
The renewable energy industry has struggled to adjust to Mr. Trump's hostility. Initially, solar executives tried to mimic his language on "energy dominance." During the debate over the Republican policy bill last year, solar companies tried to warn that cutting subsidies would cost jobs.
Lately, though, the industry has been arguing that throttling solar power will make electricity less affordable, and it's finding conservatives to make that point.
"The industry is realizing that it's not just the message, it's the messengers that matter," said Chris Moyer, the founder and president of Echo Communications Advisors, a public affairs firm focused on climate policy
"I think it's a realization of the raw politics in Washington these days, where a logical argument doesn't necessarily win the day in a policy fight," said Mr. Moyer, a onetime aide to Harry Reid, the former Senate majority leader and Nevada Democrat.
By far the most bellicose strategy has been going after Mr. Roy, one of clean energy's most vocal opponents in Congress.
Every Republican voted for Mr. Trump's "One Big Beautiful Bill," but Mr. Roy fought among the hardest to strip away tax credits and incentives for renewable energy that Democrats had passed during the Biden administration. When Mr. Trump signed the measure into law, Mr. Roy boasted that his efforts had helped guarantee that more than 90 percent of planned wind farms, solar arrays, battery factories and other projects would never begin.
"We got completely rolled," said Peter Davidson, the founder and chief executive of Aligned Climate Capital, an asset management company that invests in clean energy.
Chris Larsen stands on a rooftop wearing a blazer, blue jeans and a blue shirt.
When Mr. Davidson read a few months later that Mr. Roy was cruising toward victory in the Republican primary for Texas attorney general, he was furious. Particularly galling, he said, was that Mr. Roy's state ranks first in wind and second in solar capacity in the country, generating nearly $300 million in state and local taxes annually.
Mr. Davidson got on the phone with other executives and started the Invest in Tomorrow Coalition PAC. In addition to Mr. Larsen, other big contributors include Howard Wenger, the president of Nextpower, a solar technology and energy management company; Summit Ridge Energy, a developer of solar power projects and operator of commercial solar projects; and Thomas Matzzie, the chief executive of CleanChoice Energy, a renewable energy company. E&E News reported on the effort earlier.
"We want to be a little aggressive," Mr. Larsen said in an interview.
It was the one strategy clean energy industries hadn't tried yet.
Mr. Larsen, who made his fortune (estimated at nearly $15 billion) in cryptocurrency, said he thought clean energy could model itself after that industry, which spent heavily in recent elections. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, warned Democrats last month about crossing crypto interests on a key bill, lest they deploy their $193 million war chest.
Renewable energy, by contrast, has been "way too wimpy," Mr. Larsen said. "Look at what the oil and gas industry does, brilliantly by the way. I mean, give credit to how effective they are on lobbying and policy and supporting their allies and punishing their opponents."
Mr. Matzzie said his initial $50,000 check to try to unseat Mr. Roy was the largest he'd ever written for a political campaign during a decades-long career in climate and clean energy.
"You need to be either feared or needed for politicians to take you seriously, and that's where the industry has to invest, in my view," he said
With its first $650,000 in donations, the group hired Tusk Strategies, a political and strategic consulting firm with Democratic ties, and ran television ads in Texas and digital ones on conservative platforms like Rumble and Truth Social.
The ads didn't criticize Mr. Roy's record on renewables. Instead, the group came at him from the right, arguing the congressman is "not MAGA enough for Texas." Mr. Roy, a fiery member of the House Freedom Caucus, has occasionally clashed with Mr. Trump by threatening to derail the administration's priorities unless they include spending cuts. Another ad criticized Mr. Roy for voting not to release the Epstein files


His opponent, Mr. Middleton, an oil and gas executive as well as a state senator, put millions of his own money into the race. In the most recent reporting period, his campaign spent $5.4 million, about $2 million more than Mr. Roy's did. Mr. Middleton did not respond to a request for comment.

Mr. Roy said he primarily opposed federal subsidies for wind, solar, batteries and other clean energy development. He has also called energy that isn't derived from fossil fuels or nuclear power unreliable and environmentally damaging.
For more than a century, the tax code has allowed companies to deduct costs associated with drilling new wells and provided incentives for coal production. Mr. Trump's tax bill delivered $18 billion more to the fossil fuel industry. Yet Mr. Roy said he does not consider most of the billions in tax breaks for coal, oil and gas to be subsidies.
As Texas attorney general, Mr. Roy would not have a direct role in setting energy policy. But he promised to be a voice against what he called a "distorted market" tilted toward renewables, which he argued only enriches companies.
He said that the investors' attacks are starting to help him win support:
"I explained to people that I'm the radical Marxist left's nightmare."
Oil and gas supporters said so far they are unimpressed with clean tech's political gambits.
Thomas J. Pyle, president of the American Energy Alliance, a conservative research group that promotes fossil fuels, called the strategy of attacking lawmakers hostile to renewable energy while courting influential Trump allies a typical "carrot and stick" approach that other industries have deployed in Washington for decades.
But Mr. Pyle also accused the solar industry of "buying off MAGA pollsters" and called it a "very transparent move."
Renewables have a long way to go before they approach parity in political spending with fossil fuels. Oil and gas interests donated $75 million to elect Mr. Trump in the 2024 election, and the fossil fuel industry spent a total of $450 million on a combination of donations, lobbying and advertising
The renewable energy industry, by comparison, donated about $2.5 million in the 2024 cycle.
https://www.nytimes.com/2026/03/26/climate/solar-energy-politics-campaigns.html
#44
By Chris Buckley and Agnes Chang Feb. 15, 2026
In the lush, misty valleys of southwest China, satellite imagery reveals the country's accelerating nuclear buildup, a force designed for a new age of superpower rivalry.
One such valley is known as Zitong, in Sichuan Province, where engineers have been building new bunkers and ramparts. A new complex bristles with pipes, suggesting the facility handles highly hazardous materials.
Above the Pingtong facility entrance, a hallmark exhortation of China's leader, Xi Jinping, appears in characters so large they are visible from space: "Stay true to the founding cause and always remember our mission."
China's buildup complicates efforts to revive global arms controls after the expiration of the final remaining nuclear arms treaty between the United States and Russia. Washington argues that any successor agreements must also bind China, but Beijing has shown no interest.

He likened each nuclear location across China to a piece of a mosaic that, seen as a whole, shows a pattern of rapid growth. "There's been evolution at all of these sites, but broadly speaking, that change accelerated starting from 2019," he said.
China's nuclear expansion has been a growing source of tension with the United States. Thomas G. DiNanno, the State Department's under secretary for arms control and international security, this month publicly accused China of secretly conducting "nuclear explosive tests" in contravention of a global moratorium. Beijing has rejected the claim as untrue, and experts have debated how strong the evidence is for Mr. DiNanno's assertions.

"I think without a real dialogue on these topics, which we lack, it's really hard to say where it's going, and that, for me, is dangerous," he said, "because now we're forced to react and plan around the worst-case interpretation of a concerning trend line."

In Zitong, the new bunkers and ramparts are likely being used to test "high explosives," experts say, referring to the chemical compounds that detonate to create the conditions for a chain reaction in nuclear materials.
"You have a layer of high explosives and the shock wave at the same time implodes into the center. This needs blast tests to perfect them," said Hui Zhang, a physicist who researches China's nuclear programs at the Kennedy School of Government of Harvard University, who examined Dr. Babiarz's findings.
The complex includes an oval area about the size of 10 basketball courts.

One major concern for Washington is how this larger, more modern arsenal might change China's behavior in a crisis, particularly over Taiwan.
China wants to be "in the position where they believe they're largely immune from nuclear coercion by the United States," said Michael S. Chase, a former U.S. deputy assistant secretary of defense for China who is now a senior political scientist at RAND. "I think they probably judge that could come into play in a conventional conflict over Taiwan."

Prime Minister Mark Carney of Canada presented a budget update on Tuesday showing that his government's deficit would be less than projected last fall and that the country's economy would most likely grow over the coming year despite several key industries being buffeted by President Trump's tariffs.
The spring economic update, a mini budget of sorts, came exactly one year after Mr. Carney returned the Liberal Party to power in his first political campaign and a few weeks after special elections and defections to the Liberals by members of other parties gave him a majority and the voting control of Parliament he had been denied in that election.
But if Mr. Carney intends to use his newfound political control to change direction, there was no indication. Instead, the update underscored his broad push to reduce Canada's economic dependence on the United States by expanding trade with other countries and cutting government spending in some areas to expand military spending and large infrastructure projects like pipelines and nuclear power reactors.
"The world has been more uncertain than ever, but despite that, the Canadian economy has been resilient," François-Philippe Champagne, the finance minister, told reporters on Tuesday. "We're definitely entering a new world order."
Mr. Carney, the former central banker of Canada and England, was an investment executive until he moved into politics last year. At that time, the Conservatives seemed certain to win the election to come. Justin Trudeau, the Liberal leader at the time, had become unpopular after more than nine years in office, and his government was seen as profligate by many voters.
But Mr. Carney's background in finance reversed the party's fortunes when voters appeared to be searching for stability in the midst of Mr. Trump's trade war on Canada and his calls to turn the country into the 51st U.S. state.
Since then, Mr. Carney has, publicly at least, appeared to largely operate as his own finance minister. He again upstaged Mr. Champagne this week by announcing the only major change to be found in the update. On Monday, Mr. Carney said that Canada would set up a sovereign wealth fund like those found in Norway and several oil-rich nations in the Middle East. While the fund of 26 billion Canadian dollars, about $19 billion, is considerably smaller than those other countries' pools of money, Canadians will be able to invest their own money in Canada's new projects.
The update clarified that the 26 billion Canadian dollars will be pulled out of the government's general revenues over the next three years.
The only other significant measure outlined in the update was a plan to spend 2 billion Canadian dollars, or $1.5 billion, to train 80,000 to 100,000 people in skilled construction jobs, and an additional 3.4 billion Canadian dollars, or about $2.5 billion, to fund apprenticeships.
That program follows similar efforts by the federal government and provinces going back several years to deal with Canada's chronic shortage of construction workers.
Mr. Champagne said that previous efforts had been fragmented but that the new program would be more comprehensive.
"How many people know all these programs and all these agencies?" he said.
The document also forecast that, despite declines in the jobs-heavy automotive, steel, aluminum and forestry industries brought on by American tariffs, the economy would grow by 2 percent this year. Last year, it reached 1.7 percent after falling by 0.6 percent in the final three months.
The government said that it now expected the deficit for the current fiscal year, which began this month, to be 67 billion Canadian dollars, 11 billion dollars less than it had anticipated in the November budget.
While the recent spike in oil prices is being felt by Canadian motorists, air travelers and many industries, it is benefiting Canada's oil industry and increasing tax revenues as well as employment in that sector. Overall, the government now expects its revenues to be 9 billion Canadian dollars higher than forecast in part because fewer people are likely to lose their jobs.
In the months since November's budget, it remains unclear exactly what jobs and programs will be lost to budget cuts. And the government has introduced a variety of new spending measures like the investment fund and a temporary removal of a federal tax on gasoline and diesel fuel to partly offset the recent price hikes.
Mr. Champagne repeatedly said that the deficit remained low relative to other industrialized nations and that the government was "fiscally prudent" and careful where it cut.
"By spending less, we can invest more in the things that really matter to Canadians," he said.

A Trump 'blockade' is stalling hundreds of wind and solar projects nationwide
While President Trump's attacks on offshore wind have been highly visible, his administration has also been hobbling hundreds solar and wind energy projects on land by halting or delaying federal approvals that were once routine.
Many projects are facing potentially fatal delays, according to interviews with more than a dozen energy companies, industry groups and analysts.
The extra layer of scrutiny for wind and solar contrasts with actions by the Trump administration to make it easier and cheaper for companies to produce oil, coal, gas and nuclear power. And it sets the United States apart from other countries that are embracing renewable energy.
Some 73,000 megawatts of solar projects on land are currently at risk from political interference, according to the Solar Energy Industries Association, which called Trump's policies a "blockade." - Brad Plumer and Rebecca F. Elliott

After years of missed deadlines, New Mexico is demanding that the Energy Department expedite the cleanup of so-called legacy nuclear and hazardous waste at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, the birthplace of the atomic bomb, state environmental regulators announced on Wednesday.
The state will also fine the agency up to $16 million for violating groundwater safety standards near the lab, civil penalties outlined by the New Mexico Environment Department in a series of regulatory enforcement actions.
"The continued presence of a large volume of unremedied hazardous and radioactive waste demonstrates a longstanding lack of urgency by the U.S. Department of Energy," regulators wrote in a statement, "and elevates the risk of waste storage failures" at the lab, in northern New Mexico.

But in doing so, the lab is creating new waste before dangerous legacy byproducts, from the Cold War era, have been properly mitigated. That waste often contains plutonium, uranium or other radioactive and chemical contaminants that pose environmental and human safety risks.
"It's a legacy of failed legacy waste cleanups," said James Kenney, who leads the New Mexico Environment Department.
In a statement, a representative for the Energy Department said the agency was "committed to public safety, efficiency, and transparency," and was reviewing the actions by the state regulators.
The concerns cited by the New Mexico regulators date back decades, when Los Alamos buried nuclear and hazardous waste in unlined landfills, septic tanks and firing sites. The Energy Department estimates that roughly 500,000 cubic meters of legacy waste - the equivalent of about 200 Olympic swimming pools - remains on the campus.
Between 1956 and 1972, workers also released water contaminated with hexavalent chromium from the lab's cooling towers into a nearby canyon. The highly toxic chemical, a heavy metal and known carcinogen, drained into the ground and was discovered in the regional aquifer in 2005.
In November 2025, the chemical was detected outside the lab's eastern border, in the groundwater of the San Ildefonso Pueblo, home to a Native American tribe. Levels were found up to 140 percent higher than the state's groundwater standard. Both the state and federal government said that drinking water drawn from the aquifer was safe.
The Energy Department and New Mexico have long been embroiled in disputes over waste cleanup and disposal.

While the facility is run by a contractor and overseen by the federal government, New Mexico holds a permit for some of its waste disposal.
Over the years, the Energy Department has reached agreements with a number of states to ship their waste to the facility. Idaho, for example, negotiated with the department to prioritize the removal of its waste, much of which the state had inherited from the Rocky Flats Plant, near Denver, where bomb cores were produced during the Cold War.
But New Mexico regulators say that the federal government made those deals without their input - and without making enough progress on legacy cleanup in Los Alamos, the only place in the nation that currently produces bomb cores. The Energy Department may not be able to meet its commitments to individual states while taking in new waste, according to the Government Accountability Office, a federal watchdog that provides reports to Congress.
The repository's top shippers are the Idaho National Laboratory; Los Alamos; and the Savannah River Site, in Aiken, S.C. In recent years, shipments from Idaho have made up more than 70 percent of the annual total waste shipped to the facility, records show. In 2023, the amount from Los Alamos was 30 percent; last year, it was just 14 percent, less than half of which was legacy waste.
This year, over 500 containers filled with the remnants of 34 glove boxes - protective work stations where radioactive materials are handled - were removed from the plutonium facility at Los Alamos to make room for new ones. That waste will go to the repository in the spring, regulators say, after it is compacted at a facility in Idaho. But as of January, only one glove box had arrived in Idaho, according to Idaho's Department of Environmental Quality.
At recent public forums, Jessica Kunkle, the head of environmental management at Los Alamos, said that legacy waste was being prioritized for shipment, citing efforts to dig up and remove 158 corrugated metal pipes containing radioactive waste that were dumped in an unlined landfill in 1986.
But federal funding for legacy cleanup has been reduced, and progress is slow-moving. More than 2,000 drums of waste are stored in tents in a 63-acre section of the lab's campus. Citizen groups fear the area is fodder for wildfire. On its website, the lab said it had established a "defensible perimeter."
Then there's Material Disposal Area C, an unlined landfill filled with chemicals, sludge from waste treatment plants and objects contaminated with plutonium and uranium. Area C closed in 1974 and has yet to be cleaned up.
New Mexico pushed for Area C to be fully cleaned up, as opposed to cheaper options that would cap and cover the waste in the ground, as part of a consent order with the Energy Department. But in July, the department said it would defer the cleanup indefinitely because Area C was near the lab's plutonium handling facility and was congested with car and foot traffic.
The site is in a "safe and stable configuration," Ms. Kunkle said in December.

The state's Environment Department says such deferral is a violation of the consent order and is now requiring the federal government to submit supporting documentation for the deferral, according to one of the enforcement actions listed in Wednesday's announcement.
According to 2023 regulatory documents, contaminants from the landfill "have been detected at concentrations that pose a risk to groundwater," which local communities use for drinking water.

Jared Isaacman was in his office in mid-January, barely a month into his job as NASA administrator, when his cellphone rang.
"Jared, I want to check in with you," said President Trump, as Mr. Isaacman recounted the conversation. "Are we doing something in the 2028 window for Mars? What do you think about the nuclear rocket?"
Mr. Isaacman's agency is on the verge of one of the most momentous space landmarks of the modern era: the launch of Artemis II, a mission that is set to propel astronauts farther from the planet than any human beings have traveled in history as they loop around the moon. And yet the president was instead focused on what would come next.
Mr. Trump, who turns 80 this year, grew up in the days of Apollo, when spacefarers voyaged to another world and fired imaginations back on the one they left behind. Mr. Trump, however, wants to top the achievements of Apollo 11 and its brethren. A moon base! A nuclear rocket! A trip to Mars! And whatever it will be, it has to be huge, and it has to get started before he is due to leave office in January 2029.
The man who slaps his names on buildings and dreams of adding his face to Mount Rushmore hopes to make history by pushing space exploration to new heights, literally and figuratively. No president since NASA's glory days under John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson has pressed the space agency as hard as Mr. Trump.
The upcoming launch of Artemis II will be the first step in the journey. Four astronauts are scheduled to fly to the moon as soon as Wednesday, the first humans to travel there in the more than half a century since the end of the Apollo program.
In an interview, Mr. Isaacman said the president's goals were driven by a constellation of national security, commercial, resource and technological interests, as well as his preternatural instinct for grand undertakings.
"The president knows the importance of taking on big, bold endeavors and he does it across all of the important technological domains," Mr. Isaacman said. "So when he talks to me about returning to the moon, he doesn't talk about a repeat of Apollo. He says, Do we build a moon base? What does the lunar economy look like? We're not just going to plant the flag."
In fact, Mr. Isaacman said, Mr. Trump has made clear that humans need to stay. "What I have heard him say many times is, 'Make sure when we go back that we are not going for the brief Apollo program,'" Mr. Isaacman said. "He specifically said, 'We better be doing more than getting rocks this time.'"
Liz Huston, a White House spokeswoman, said in a statement that the president is "building on the transformational achievements" of his first term. "With President Trump's America-first policies, the United States will lead humanity into space and enter a new era of groundbreaking achievements in space technology and exploration."
Mr. Trump was not exactly a space aficionado before coming to office. He is not known for waxing romantically about watching Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin land on the moon in 1969 when he was 23 years old.
When a 10-year-old boy asked Mr. Trump about space in 2015 during a campaign stop in New Hampshire, the candidate seemed indifferent. "Right now, we have bigger problems - you understand that?" he said. "We've got to fix our potholes."
But along the way, he became persuaded that fixing potholes was not exactly the same as reaching for the stars. Just weeks before the 2016 election, his campaign's surrogates pledged "a new vision" for America's space program.
"During the campaign, he saw the linkages between space and the larger 'Make America Great' grand vision," said Scott Pace, the director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, who served as executive secretary of the National Space Council, which Mr. Trump reconstituted in his first term.
Mr. Kennedy set the goal of reaching the moon not out of love of exploration, but to compete with the Soviets. Once Americans won the space race, the public and presidents largely lost interest.
Richard M. Nixon scrapped the final three Apollo moonshots and shifted resources into building a workmanlike space shuttle. Ronald Reagan kicked off the development of a permanent crewed space station, which Bill Clinton transformed into a joint venture with the Russians. George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush each set sights on returning to the moon and then going to Mars, but neither got far. Barack Obama wanted to land astronauts on an asteroid, a vision that went nowhere.
Mr. Trump, however, came to see space as a place to make a mark. He invited Mr. Aldrin and Michael Collins, Mr. Aldrin's Apollo 11 crewmate, to the White House for the 50th anniversary of their historic flight, and put Mr. Aldrin in the gallery for his State of the Union address in 2019. He flew to Florida to personally witness the SpaceX launch in 2020 as Elon Musk's company helped restore NASA's ability to send astronauts to the International Space Station from its own soil.
Whether the president will remain attentive to Artemis II is an open question. As the launch date got pushed further off, Mr. Trump did nothing to call attention to the upcoming mission. Even though its four astronauts were in the gallery for his State of the Union address in February, Mr. Trump did not acknowledge them nor mention their forthcoming journey. Nor has he said much about Artemis in the days leading up to this week's scheduled launch.
With China making great advances in space, and Mr. Musk pushing to go to Mars, Mr. Trump in his first term adopted the idea of returning to the moon as a step toward eventually reaching the red planet. He likewise decided to establish a Space Force in "a typically Trumpian way," as former Vice President Mike Pence put it in his memoir; Mr. Trump mused out loud during a speech to Marines about creating a new branch of the armed forces focused on the heavens, and then made it a reality.
"There's no question this president loves competition and loves to win," said Steve Crisafulli, a former Florida House speaker who served on Mr. Trump's space council in the first term. "This is one of those things that he gets to say that he's winning, and rightfully so."
While new presidents often switch space priorities when they take office, Joseph R. Biden Jr. kept both the Artemis program and the Space Force during his tenure.
But some supporters of space exploration worry that Mr. Trump's support for the big splashy programs come at a cost. The Trump administration last year proposed cutting NASA funding by 24 percent, which would have terminated more than 40 missions.
Congress ultimately included billions of dollars for the Artemis program as part of Mr. Trump's giant tax-cut-and-spending measure last year, and in January, lawmakers rejected most of the other proposed budget cuts in another spending measure. Even so, nearly 4,000 NASA employees are leaving as part of federal downsizing.
Cady Coleman, a retired astronaut who went to space three times and spent six months aboard the space station, said she remained concerned by the exodus of experienced people from NASA. "I just hope that Trump understands that and understands the devastation of not letting really good people do their jobs," she said.
But she added that astronauts have faith in Mr. Isaacman, a billionaire pilot who paid to fly himself into orbit aboard SpaceX's Crew Dragon capsules twice. "He's just a great person for this job and he brings incredible skills," Ms. Coleman said.
Mr. Isaacman had a bumpy ride to NASA's executive suite: Mr. Trump pulled his nomination after falling out with Mr. Isaacman's patron, Mr. Musk, then months later renominated him as the president and the billionaire reconciled. Now, Mr. Isaacman said, he is confident that he has the president's backing, pointing to a new space policy signed the same day that the new administrator himself was sworn in. "I have immense support," he said.
Mr. Isaacman said that it made sense to re-evaluate programs that have ballooned in cost, but expected to have what he needs for Artemis and other priority missions. And he predicted that the Artemis program would reinvigorate global support. "I have no doubt when we launch, it will captivate the world's interest in NASA again," he said.
But NASA faces uncertainties about the schedule of its moon program after Artemis II. Keeping the world captivated could depend heavily on Mr. Trump's ongoing commitment.
"As something as technically challenging as spaceflight is, you have to have the White House and the president acting as the spokesman for it," said Harrison H. Schmitt, one of the last two men to step foot on the moon as part of the Apollo 17 mission in 1972 and one of only four moon walkers still alive today. "There's just no question about that."

President Trump's social media company, which has consistently lost money and struggled with a flagging share price, announced Tuesday that it was replacing Devin Nunes as its chief executive officer.
The announcement offered no reason for the sudden departure of Mr. Nunes, a former Republican congressman from California. Mr. Trump had tapped him to run the company, Trump Media & Technology, in late 2021.
The announcement was made in a news release by the president's eldest son, Donald Trump Jr., who is a company board member and oversees a trust that controls his father's 115-million-share stake in Trump Media. President Trump is not an officer or director of the company.
Mr. Nunes said in a statement on Truth Social, which is Trump Media's flagship product, that it was an "appropriate time" for a new leader with experience in media and mergers to "steer Trump Media through its current transition phase."
Trump Media has incurred hundreds of millions in losses, and its shares have performed poorly since the company went public by completing a merger with a cash-rich special purpose acquisition company, or SPAC, in March 2024. The stock, which ended its first day of trading around $58 a share, closed Tuesday at $9.82.
Shares of Trump Media trade under the symbol DJT, which are President Trump's initials. Truth Social has emerged as the main social media platform for Mr. Trump to communicate his policy decisions and opinions to the world.
Last year, Trump Media took in $3.7 million in revenue and recorded a $712 million net loss.
In December, Trump Media announced a plan to merge with TAE Technologies, a fusion power company. The all-stock deal, which was valued at $6 billion at the time, would create one of the first publicly traded nuclear fusion companies.
Trump Media said in February that it was considering spinning off its Truth Social platform in a merger with another cash-rich SPAC, Texas Ventures Acquisition III Corp.

The Trump administration on Tuesday announced a plan for billions of dollars in federal loans aimed at spurring the country's largest build-out of nuclear power plants in more than three decades.
The complex and unusual strategy, which would be overseen by the Energy Department, would provide up to $17.5 billion in low-cost loans to help electric utilities buy expensive components that could be used in up to 10 new AP1000 nuclear reactors, a large type of reactor designed by Westinghouse.
Electric utilities would need to put up hundreds of millions of dollars of their own money to unlock the federal financing, and none have publicly announced their participation yet. While a number of utilities have expressed interest in building large new nuclear power plants to meet rising electricity demand, many have so far been deterred by the difficulty and financial risk of doing so.
The Trump administration is hoping to persuade power companies to take the plunge by coordinating a sizable order of equipment for new reactors ahead of time, such as steam generators and coolant pumps. Those components can typically make up one-quarter of the cost of a new reactor.
"This deal plays an important role in reviving the supply chain needed for America to once again build large-scale commercial reactors," said Energy Secretary Chris Wright.
Nuclear power has seen a resurgence of bipartisan interest in the United States in recent years, especially as demand for electricity rises. Nuclear reactors don't emit planet-warming greenhouse gases, unlike coal and gas plants, and they can produce electricity around the clock, unlike wind turbines and solar panels. While some Democrats remain opposed because of concerns over safety and the disposal of nuclear waste, others have come to see it as a crucial technology for fighting climate change.
One of the biggest obstacles to nuclear power, however, has been the time and enormous expense involved in building large new plants. Only two AP1000 reactors have ever been completed in the United States, at the Vogtle nuclear power plant in Georgia. Those colossal reactors came online in 2023 and 2024, and today, they generate enough electricity to power roughly 1 million homes and businesses. But they took 15 years to build and cost $35 billion, double the initial estimates, after facing numerous delays and construction snags.
Utilities in South Carolina also tried to build two AP1000s but abandoned the effort in 2017 after costs soared past $9 billion.
Many utilities and tech companies have been scared off by the staggering price tag of large plants and have since explored investing in a new generation of smaller reactors that, they hope, will be easier to finance. Some early small reactor projects are already underway in Wyoming and Tennessee.
Yet the Trump administration has also been trying to convince companies to build large reactors like the AP1000 - in part because the technology is more proven and can generate vast amounts of power - and has set a goal of getting at least 10 under construction by 2030.
The federal loan guarantee, the first of its kind, aims to encourage utilities to take the first step toward building AP1000 reactors by banding together to buy components like reactor vessels that can take three or four years to manufacture. The idea is that bulk orders would make it faster and cheaper to build the reactors. Some of the parts would have to come from places like Japan or South Korea, since the United States no longer has the capacity to make many of them.
The plan envisions financing up to five pairs of reactors around the country. For each reactor pair, Westinghouse would provide $500 million and a utility partner would provide $500 million, while the federal government would backstop roughly $4 billion in debt. Taxpayers could be on the hook for losses from the loans, though utilities could resell any components they ordered to other companies or countries trying to build AP1000 reactors.
Even after ordering the parts, utilities would still need to make a final decision on whether to build the reactors, which requires approval from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that oversees the safety of the nation's nuclear plants. The Energy Department has separately said that it can backstop roughly $100 billion worth of construction loans, while Congress has approved lucrative tax credits that could offset up to 50 percent of the cost of new reactors.

Still, there are huge hurdles ahead - and no guarantees that any companies will ultimately move forward with building large reactors, despite the hefty incentives.
The Energy Department said that seven utilities had signed formal letters of intent to participate in the program, but it did not name any of them. In a recent note, analysts at the investment bank Jefferies warned that any publicly traded utility that announced its participation would probably see its stock price drop initially, as many investors remained extremely wary of the risks that the multibillion-dollar plants could face delays or cost overruns.
At least some state regulators and utilities have said they would need even more extensive federal protections - including some sort of insurance against the risk of overruns - before building large reactors like the AP1000 again.
"If you build 10 reactors, the first three will be expensive, and you don't know how much, that's the problem," said Armond Cohen, executive director of the Clean Air Task Force, an environmental group that supports nuclear power. "Developers and utilities are all saying the problem is we can't take unlimited balance sheet risks."
The Energy Department has been more optimistic. Under the Biden administration, the agency released an analysis suggesting that some of the problems that plagued the Vogtle project in Georgia - such as construction beginning before the AP1000's design was complete - have since been solved and that subsequent reactors would be cheaper. China has been building its own modified version of the AP1000 in recent years, and after some early hurdles, is now on track to have more than a dozen up and running by 2030.

Train networks across Western Europe were snarled by heat that threatened to buckle tracks. Several nuclear reactors in France shuttered or slowed because the cooling water they were discharging into rivers was getting too hot. Museums curtailed hours because they couldn't control the heat.
At a French auto plant, union leaders called for a strike, saying conditions on the factory floor had become excruciating. And electricity outages knocked out power for hundreds of thousands in France and Italy.
The heat seeped through thick-walled apartments and turned cities into hotboxes that couldn't cool at night. Sleep-deprived Europeans staggered into parks after midnight, or joined in frenzies to buy portable air-conditioning units, or even sought refuge in hotels.
"Everyone is asking, why are we not ready?" said Francois Gemenne, a professor and specialist in environmental politics at HEC Paris, a business school. "We are becoming aware of our own vulnerability."
The heat wave, holding its grip for nearly a week, has toppled temperature records in Britain, Spain and France. It's also hastened a realization that Europe isn't prepared for what is coming as heat waves intensify because of rising greenhouse gas emissions. The world's fastest-warming continent is filled with buildings and infrastructure designed for a climate that no longer exists.
That is making extreme stretches of high temperatures far more disruptive in Europe than in parts of the world more accustomed to such conditions. A recent report from Allianz, the German financial and insurance company, singled out Italy, France, Germany and Spain as among the "most exposed economies" to economic losses from heat.
The insufficient infrastructure has deadly consequences.
On Thursday, France put its health system on the highest alert level, as its health minister, Stéphanie Rist, described a fourfold rise in cardiac arrest cases. In Spain, statistics showed a bump in mortality.
While these are just early signals of a potentially larger toll, they match research showing the risks for Europe. A 2023 study compared 800 cities, looking at the rate at which mortality can curve upward as temperatures rise. While heat barely increases the risk of death in cities like Houston or Tokyo, it leads to drastic upward spikes in the cities of France, Spain and Italy.
Reduced access to air-conditioning contributes to these differences. But that is far from the only factor. In Northern Europe, buildings that may have been built decades or even centuries ago tend to use insulating materials and end up trapping warm air. They rarely have external shutters, one of the easiest ways to block solar radiation and prevent indoor temperatures from rising.
"They are not well prepared to cope with this level of heat," said Anna Mavrogianni, an expert on the built environment at University College London.
Policymakers for years have talked about retrofitting buildings and improving other infrastructure for an era of rising temperatures. France last year released a 388-page adaptation plan with 52 measures. And London this week rolled out a city heat plan that calls for widespread home renovations and upgrades to public buildings, citing more than 1,300 schools, 60 hospitals and 351 care homes at high risk.
But all these goals come at huge cost, and it has so far proven easier to put them on paper than find money to implement them. The European Environment Agency said last year that all European Union countries have adaptation plans, but cited "insufficient long-term funding" as a common obstacle.
 "It's the tragedy of the horizons," Dr. Gemenne said. "You need to put money on the table right now to avoid costs in the future."
At a news conference Thursday, French President Emmanuel Macron defended his country's response to global warming but added that France was experiencing a "completely unprecedented moment."
The heat reached such a level that it forced stoppages or slowdowns this week of reactors at four French nuclear power stations, said EDF, which operates France's nuclear plants. In normal times, plants keep their reactors safely cool with river water, and then discharge that water at a higher temperature. But regulations designed to protect the river ecosystem prohibit that discharge if temperatures get too hot.
An EDF spokeswoman, Laura Mandin, said in a statement that the company is investing to make its plants "even more resilient" during heat waves. At one facility in Civaux it is already using a system that cools down water before it is discharged.
Europe has been warming at the rate of 1 degree Fahrenheit per decade - meaning infrastructure is facing stresses that would have been unthinkable when built. Train tracks are at particular risk, because heat can make them expand and buckle. This led to cancellations in Germany, Switzerland and Britain. Other routes, including in France, were canceled because trains lacked air-conditioning or because onboard systems couldn't withstand the temperatures.

China is quickly becoming the global leader in nuclear power, with nearly as many reactors under construction as the rest of the world combined. While its dominance of solar panels and electric vehicles is well known, China is also building nuclear plants at an extraordinary pace. By 2030, China's nuclear capacity is set to surpass that of the United States, the first country to split atoms to make electricity.
Many of China's reactors are derived from American and French designs, yet China has overcome the construction delays and cost overruns that have bogged down Western efforts to expand nuclear power.
At the same time, China is pushing the envelope, making breakthroughs in next-generation nuclear technologies that have eluded the West. The country is also investing heavily in fusion, a potentially limitless source of clean power if anyone can figure out how to tame it.
Beijing's ultimate objective is to become a supplier of nuclear power to the world, joining the rare few nations - including the United States, Russia, France and South Korea - that can design and export some of the most sophisticated machines ever invented. "The Chinese are moving very, very fast," said Mark Hibbs, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace who has written a book on China's nuclear program. "They are very keen to show the world that their program is unstoppable."
As the United States and China compete for global supremacy, energy has become a geopolitical battleground. The United States, particularly under President Trump, has positioned itself as the leading supplier of fossil fuels like oil, gas and coal. China, by contrast, dominates the manufacturing of solar panels, wind turbines and batteries, seeing renewable power as the multi-trillion-dollar market of the future.
Nuclear power is enjoying a resurgence of global interest, especially as concerns about climate change mount. That's because nuclear reactors don't spew planet-warming emissions, unlike coal and gas plants, and can produce electricity around the clock, unlike wind and solar power. The Trump administration wants to quadruple U.S. nuclear power capacity by 2050, even as it ignores global warming, and it hopes to develop a new generation of reactor technology to power data centers at home and sell to energy-hungry countries overseas. Officials fear that if China dominates the nuclear export market, it could expand its global influence, since building nuclear plants abroad creates deep, decades-long relationships between countries.
Yet in the race for atomic energy, China has one clear advantage: It has figured out how to produce reactors relatively quickly and cheaply. The country now assembles reactors in just five to six years, twice as fast as Western nations.
While U.S. nuclear construction costs skyrocketed after the 1960s, they fell by half in China during the 2000s and have since stabilized, according to data published recently in Nature. (The only two U.S. reactors built this century, at the Vogtle nuclear plant in Waynesboro, Ga., took 11 years and cost $35 billion.)
"When we first got this data and saw that declining trend in China, it surprised me," said Shangwei Liu, a research fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government who led the paper.
The big questions, Mr. Liu said, are how China got so good at nuclear power - and whether the United States can catch up.
How China mastered nuclear power
A modern nuclear power plant is one of the most complex construction projects on Earth.
The reactor vessel, where atoms are split, is made of specialized steel up to 10 inches thick that must withstand bombardment by radiation for decades. That vessel, in turn, is housed in a massive containment dome, often three stories high and about as wide as the U.S. Capitol dome, made of steel-reinforced concrete to prevent dangerous leaks. Thousands of miles of piping and wiring must meet exacting safety standards.
Financing these multibillion-dollar projects is staggeringly difficult. Even minor problems, like needing regulator approval to modify a component midway through, can lead to long delays and can cause borrowing costs to skyrocket.
Over time, China has conquered this process.
It starts with heavy government support. Three state-owned nuclear developers receive cheap government-backed loans to build new reactors, which is valuable since financing can be one-third of costs. The Chinese government also requires electric grid operators to buy some of the power from nuclear plants at favorable rates.
Just as importantly, China's nuclear companies build only a handful of reactor types and they do it over and over again.
That allows developers to perfect the construction process and is "essential for scaling efficiently," said Joy Jiang, an energy innovation analyst at the Breakthrough Institute, a pro-nuclear research organization. "It means you can streamline licensing and simplify your supply chain."
The fact that the Chinese government has a national mandate to expand nuclear power means that companies can confidently invest in domestic factories and a dedicated engineering work force. In a sprawling complex near Shanghai, giant reactor pressure vessels are being continuously forged, ready to be shipped to new projects without delay. Teams of specialized welders move seamlessly from one construction site to the next.
It's been different in the West.
In the 1970s and 1980s, U.S. nuclear construction slowed to a trickle as interest rates rose and regulators frequently tightened safety rules, causing delays. Worries about the disposal of nuclear waste and fears after the 1979 partial meltdown of a reactor at Three Mile Island, in Pennsylvania, didn't help. At the same time, private developers kept experimenting with new reactor designs that required different components and introduced fresh complications. U.S. nuclear power died from a lack of predictability.
The contrast became glaring in the late 2000s, when U.S. utilities tried to revive nuclear power with a new reactor model called the AP1000, with improved safety features. Developers struggled with the novel technology, leading to repeated delays and soaring costs. By the time the two reactors in Georgia were finished last year, most utilities were hesitant to try again.
As it happened, China built AP1000s at the same time. It, too, faced severe challenges, such as difficulties in obtaining coolant pumps and unpredictable cost spikes. But instead of giving up, Chinese officials studied what went wrong and concluded they needed to tweak the design and develop domestic supply chains.
"What the Chinese did was really smart," said James Krellenstein, the chief executive of Alva Energy, a nuclear developer. "They said, we're going to pause for a few years and incorporate every lesson learned."
China is now building nine more copies of that reactor, known as the CAP1000, all on pace to be completed within five years at a drastically lower cost, an Energy Department report found.
Nuclear proponents in the United States sometimes argue that overly strict safety regulations drive up costs.
China's safety requirements are similar. But in China the approval process is more predictable, and opponents have fewer ways to challenge a project. Most reactors in China break ground weeks after receiving final approval from the safety regulator, according to research by Ms. Jiang. In the United States, by contrast, projects often need additional permits from state governments that can take months or years.
"China is practiced at building really big things, everything from dams to highways to high speed rail, and those project management skills are transferable," said David Fishman, a power sector consultant at Lantau Group, a consulting firm.
As China, the world's biggest emitter of greenhouse gases, seeks to curb pollution, it is counting on nuclear power to play an important role.
Solar and wind power are growing fast and account for most of China's clean electricity, but the country also burns enormous amounts of coal to supply power when the sun isn't shining and the wind isn't blowing. More nuclear power could help backstop renewables and displace coal.
China's nuclear expansion still faces hurdles. One of China's plants suffered a smaller radioactive leak in 2021, and a bigger accident could trigger a public backlash. The country is still figuring out where to bury its nuclear waste, and some cities have seen impassioned protests over plans for waste reprocessing plants. Beijing has also blocked new reactors in much of China's interior over concerns about their water use. If that moratorium persists, it could limit the industry's growth.
For now, though, the country is barreling ahead, with plans to build hundreds of reactors by midcentury.
Can the U.S. catch up?
In the United States, nuclear power is one of the rare types of energy that has support from Republican and Democratic politicians alike, especially as demand for electricity rises. Even environmentalists like Al Gore who once fretted about catastrophic accidents and radioactive waste are warming to the technology.
Yet the U.S. is pursuing a starkly different path to nuclear expansion, one that leans more heavily on private innovation than government backing.
Dozens of start-ups are working on a new generation of smaller reactors meant to be cheaper than the hulking plants of old. Tech companies like Google, Amazon and OpenAI are pouring billions into nuclear start-ups like Kairos Power, X-Energy and Oklo to help power their data centers for artificial intelligence. Early projects are underway in Wyoming, Texas and Tennessee, though few, if any, new reactors are expected before the 2030s.
The Trump administration wants to accelerate this work by reducing regulations at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which certifies the safety of reactors before they are built. The agency's critics say it has become too hidebound to handle advanced reactors that are less prone to meltdowns.
Energy Secretary Chris Wright said that the administration is betting that the private capital flowing into nuclear projects will spark American ingenuity and catapult the U.S. ahead of China. "Entrepreneurial capitalist competition is where the U.S. thrives, and I think it's an advantage over China," he said in an interview.
Yet some worry that the United States is betting too heavily on technological breakthroughs instead of focusing on the financing, skills and infrastructure needed to build plants, as China has. The U.S., for instance, has lost almost all of its heavy forging capacity to make large reactor components. A new generation of advanced reactors could also take years to perfect, leaving America behind.
"You look at the number of designs, particularly in the U.S., you think, Oh, God, help us," said Philip Andrews-Speed, a senior research fellow at the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies. "I would think narrowing down is the sensible thing to do."
While the Trump administration has moved to speed up nuclear permitting and increase domestic supplies of nuclear fuel, some important government tools for advancing new reactors, such as the Energy Department's loan office, have been hampered by staffing cuts. Efforts to slash safety regulations could be contentious. There is also a risk that interest by tech giants could fizzle if the A.I. boom slows.
"There's no reason the United States couldn't expand nuclear power," said Stephen Ezell, vice president for global innovation policy at the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation. "But are we just going to see a few small reactors power a few data centers, or are we going to see a serious whole government approach to bring back nuclear power as an essential source of electricity?" China's fast-paced nuclear program is a prelude to a larger goal: dominating the global market. Chinese companies have already built six reactors in Pakistan and plan to export many more.
At the same time, China is working to surpass the United States in technological innovation. China has built what it calls the world's first "fourth generation" reactor, a gas-cooled model that can provide heat and steam for heavy industry in addition to electricity. The Chinese are also pursuing technologies that use less uranium, such as thorium reactors, or recycle spent nuclear fuel. It's a recognition that China doesn't have enough domestic uranium for a massive build-out of traditional reactors.
Even if U.S. companies and labs remain at the forefront of innovation, one recent report warned that China was 10 to 15 years ahead of the United States in its ability to deploy next-generation reactors widely.
It's a familiar story: The United States invented solar panels and batteries, only to watch as China scaled those technologies and now controls global markets.
"Maybe we can convince some of our allies not to buy Chinese reactors, but there are going to be plenty of other countries out there with growing energy demands," said Paul Saunders, president of the Center for National Interest, a conservative-leaning think tank. "And if America isn't ready, we won't be able to compete." 

The world's largest and most influential development bank said on Wednesday it would lift its longstanding ban on funding nuclear power projects.
The decision by the board of the World Bank could have profound implications for the ability of developing countries to industrialize without burning planet-warming fuels such as coal and oil.
The ban has been formally in place since 2013, but the last time the bank funded a nuclear power project was 1959 in Italy. In the decades since, a few of the bank's major funders, particularly Germany, have opposed its involvement in nuclear energy, on the grounds that the risk of catastrophic accidents in poor countries with less expertise in nuclear technology was unacceptably high.
The bank's policy shift, described in an email to employees late on Wednesday, comes as nuclear power is experiencing a global surge in support.
Casting nuclear power as an essential replacement for fossil fuels, more than 20 countries - including the United States, Canada, France and Ghana - signed a pledge to triple nuclear power by 2050 at the United Nations' flagship climate conference two years ago.
The Trump administration, while far less concerned about climate change than it is with competing against the Russian and Chinese nuclear industries, is trying to expand the fleet of American reactors and quadruple their contribution to the country's electric grids. Cabinet officials have emphasized support for a new generation of smaller reactors that offer the promise of faster deployment but have yet to be proven.
The United States is the World Bank's single largest shareholder and holds significant sway over its policies. In April, Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent urged the bank to lift its ban, saying in a speech that doing so would "revolutionize energy supply for many emerging markets."

A new government in Germany, led by the Christian Democratic Union, has voiced support for nuclear power, particularly the smaller next-generation reactors. Germany decided to phase out its own reactors after the Fukushima disaster in 2011 and shuttered its last reactor in 2023.
Even the Union of Concerned Scientists, long a voice of caution on nuclear proliferation, has softened its stance in recent years, saying that while it doesn't support building new reactors, "the low-carbon electricity provided by existing nuclear power plants is increasingly valuable in the fight against climate change."
The bank's move was welcomed by proponents of nuclear power as an alternative to fossil fuels, the burning of which is the leading cause of global warming.
"If you care about getting the world off coal, then this is potentially massive, especially in Southeast Asia," said Todd Moss, executive director of the Energy for Growth Hub. Countries like Vietnam and Indonesia are heavily coal dependent and have sought loans to help them retire coal plants early by replacing them with cleaner alternatives.
The bank stopped funding oil and gas drilling projects in 2017, but continues to work on some gas-related infrastructure in developing countries. In Wednesday's email to staff members, the bank's president, Ajay Banga, also raised the possibility that a ban on funding oil and gas drilling could be lifted in the future, but no agreement had been reached.
Over the past decade, the bank has ramped up the proportion of its funding that goes to projects that either help reduce greenhouse gas emissions or help poor countries adapt to climate change. That has led to criticism from the Trump administration. But Mr. Banga has vowed to keep his climate commitments while expanding energy access to hundreds of millions of people in Africa who still lack it. Much of that effort relies on small-scale solar power.
How Close Are the Planet's Climate Tipping Points?
Earth's warming could trigger sweeping changes in the natural world that would be hard, if not impossible, to reverse.
"I'm not a climate evangelist," Mr. Banga said in an interview this year. "I'm just the guy getting the stuff done."
Russia, China, the United States and European countries are at varying stages of developing small modular reactors and World Bank financing could help spur their development by opening up new markets in the developing world.
Currently, developing countries largely look to Russia and China for nuclear technology and financing. Because those countries have nuclear energy companies that are partly or wholly state-owned, and which control everything from fuel to financing to construction, developing countries are able to approach them as easy one-stop shops.
"The Russian and Chinese deals come with 30- to 40-year fuel-lockup agreements," Mr. Moss said. His organization estimates that 20 countries that do not have access to nuclear energy either already have the technical expertise to begin construction or would by 2030.
Ghana, for instance, has urged the World Bank to change its nuclear policy because it wants to build its own reactors without having to throw its lot into one geopolitical corner. It has been trying since the 1960s.
"Things have been slow for us because of global politics around nuclear, but we have been preparing, setting up an institutional structure, identifying sites," said Ishmael Ackah, a technical adviser to Ghana's Energy Ministry. "We want a 24-hour economy, industrial production to be happening day and night," Mr. Ackah said.

Nuclear reactors have been generating power on Earth for more than 70 years. How hard would it be to place one on the moon to provide copious, continuous energy through the cold, dark, two-week-long lunar nights? And could that be accomplished in less than five years?
Sean Duffy, the secretary of transportation who is now also NASA's acting administrator, called for just that last week: a reactor producing at least 100 kilowatts of electricity - enough to power about 80 households in the United States - that would launch to the moon before 2030.
Why put a nuclear reactor in space?
Nuclear reactor technology would transform the ability of humanity to travel and live in the solar system. Many of NASA's robotic spacecraft today operate at power levels equivalent to what a few incandescent lightbulbs consume. That limits what scientific instruments can be put on board.
The International Space Station gets its energy from swaths of solar panels, but that is not practical for human habitats on the moon, where the cold, dark night lasts two weeks, or on Mars, where the sun is farther away and dimmer.
Nuclear reactors would also enable faster and more efficient propulsion systems.
Putting radioactive energy sources in space is not unusual. The Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 space probes, which are still operating after launching in 1977, are powered by plutonium, with the heat of natural radioactive decay turned into electricity. The plutonium heat initially generated 470 watts. In the decades since, the power output has dwindled to about 225 watts.
But the plutonium power sources on the Voyagers are more like batteries than nuclear power plants on Earth. Fission - the chain-reaction splitting of atoms like uranium - releases much more energy than solar panels and the power sources on the Voyagers.
This is what Mr. Duffy's order aims to harness.
"The Secretary has made it very clear in his new role as acting administrator that we need to go bigger and bolder than what we did with Apollo," said a senior NASA official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the background of Mr. Duffy's directive.
"Everything needs power," the official said.
A reactor and a kilogram of uranium would be able to produce "as much energy as a freight train full of coal," said Bhavya Lal, a former associate administrator for technology, policy, and strategy at NASA. Dr. Lal and Roger Myers, a former executive at Aerojet Rocketdyne, recently wrote a white paper that argued for a demonstration of a nuclear reactor in space by 2030. "That changes the paradigm."
How would a nuclear reactor on the moon work?
A reactor on the moon would not operate in quite the same way as one on Earth.
For one, it has to be small enough and light enough to fit inside a rocket. Safety precautions would include not turning the reactor on until it reached the moon
On the moon, there is also no water or air. The surface swings between 250 degrees Fahrenheit during the day and minus 400 degrees at night. Those make it more difficult to manage the reactor's temperature to keep it operating efficiently. Proposed designs of lunar reactors typically include large radiators to dissipate heat.
Kevin Au, the vice president of lunar exploration at Lockheed Martin, said the biggest challenge of a higher-power reactor would be developing materials that could survive hotter temperatures for use in the conversion of heat to electricity.
Still, experts say building such a power source falls within what is realistically possible.
"It's not science fiction," said Sebastian Corbisiero, a senior program manager at Idaho National Laboratory who leads the Energy Department's space reactor program. "This is very doable."
How feasible is the lunar reactor plan?
However, building a reactor and launching it by 2030 seems unrealistic to some outside experts. They also call it somewhat perplexing because NASA is not currently planning anything on the lunar surface that would require a reactor there that soon.
 "It's just a very aggressive, frankly unrealistic timeline for something that is good and should happen," said Kathryn Huff, a former nuclear energy official at the Department of Energy who is now a professor of nuclear, plasma and radiological engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. "My understanding is that its intent was to power an outpost. So it feels a little silly to do so without an outpost."
Beyond the necessary work to design and build a lunar reactor, navigating the regulatory approvals for launching one would take a couple of years, Dr. Huff said.
The NASA official said the 2030 date aims to provide focus and motivation.
"Urgency is the name of the game," the official said. "If we put it too far in the future, we're not going to achieve it, right?"
Mr. Duffy's directive also cites plans by China and Russia to build a nuclear reactor for a lunar base near the moon's south pole. The fear is that a keep-out zone around the reactor could limit what the United States could do on the moon.

The official declined to say how much money would be devoted to the program, but said it could be in the hundreds of millions of dollars, or more than a billion.
Who might build a nuclear reactor for NASA?
In 2022, NASA, along with the Idaho laboratory, awarded contracts for initial design studies for a lunar reactor that would produce 40 kilowatts. Those small-scale efforts were led by Lockheed Martin, which has built many of NASA's spacecraft; Westinghouse, a heavyweight in the nuclear power industry; and a collaboration between two start-ups, Intuitive Machines and X-energy.
All three studies failed to fit their reactor designs within the goal of weighing less than six metric tons.
"The technology does not exist to do that," said Vincent Bilardo, executive director of the nuclear space program at Intuitive Machines, which twice has landed small spacecraft on the moon. "It's more like a nine- to 10-metric-ton system at that 40 kilowatt power level."
A fission system producing 100 kilowatts would probably be more massive. For the reactor itself, "it's not that huge of a change," said John Kennedy, who leads the space nuclear program at X-energy.
But other pieces like the radiation shielding and the apparatus for converting heat to electricity would have to be larger, Dr. Kennedy said.
Mr. Duffy's directive, however, says the lander taking the reactor to the surface would have a payload capacity of 15 metric tons.
No such spacecraft currently exists, but cargo versions of the two landers that are being developed to take astronauts to the moon's surface - SpaceX's Starship and Blue Origin's Blue Moon - would meet that requirement.
Both Mr. Bilardo of Intuitive Machines and Mr. Au of Lockheed Martin said their companies would bid for the NASA contracts. Other companies could also submit proposals.
"We're glad to see this coming out," Mr. Au said. "This is right in line with our strategies."

President Trump signed four executive orders on Friday aimed at accelerating the construction of nuclear power plants in the United States, including a new generation of small, advanced reactors that offer the promise of faster deployment but have yet to be proven.
One order directs the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the nation's independent safety regulator, to streamline its rules and to take no more than 18 months to approve applications for new reactors. The order also urges the agency to consider lowering its safety limits for radiation exposure, saying that current rules go beyond what is needed to protect human health.
Another order directs the Energy and Defense departments to explore siting reactors on federal lands and military bases, possibly alongside new data centers. That could allow the agencies to bypass the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and develop their own, faster processes for approving reactors.
The Trump administration also set a goal of quadrupling the size of the nation's fleet of nuclear power plants, from nearly 100 gigawatts of electric capacity today to 400 gigawatts by 2050. One gigawatt is enough to power nearly 1 million homes.
"This is a huge day for the nuclear industry," said Doug Burgum, the interior secretary, as he stood behind Mr. Trump at a signing ceremony in the Oval Office. "Mark this day on your calendar. This is going to turn the clock back on over 50 years of overregulation."
In one of his first acts in office, Mr. Trump declared a "national energy emergency," saying the country did not have enough electricity to meet its growing needs, particularly for data centers that run artificial intelligence. While most of Mr. Trump's actions have focused on boosting coal, oil and natural gas, administration officials have supported nuclear power, too.
Nuclear power enjoys bipartisan backing in Congress. While some Democrats remain opposed because of concerns about safety and disposal of nuclear waste, an increasing number have embraced the technology because it doesn't produce planet-warming emissions. It also gets backing from Republicans who say nuclear power plants strengthen U.S. energy security.
House Speaker Mike Johnson stands at a podium that carries a sign that says "One Big Beautiful Bill Act." He is flanked by about a dozen other Republicans, all standing in front of a portrait of George Washington. 
The far-reaching domestic policy bill passed by House Republicans this week aimed to halt federal support for most types of emissions-free power. But the nuclear industry got an exemption: Companies aiming to build new reactors would still be able to get a tax break as long as they begin construction by the end of 2028.
Even so, developing new reactors in the United States has proved enormously difficult.
While the country has the world's largest fleet of nuclear power plants, only three new reactors have come online since 1996. Many utilities have been scared off by the cost: The two most recent reactors built at the Vogtle nuclear power plant in Georgia totaled $35 billion, double the initial estimates, and arrived seven years behind schedule.
Trump's Moves on Climate and the Environment
In recent years, more than a dozen companies have begun developing a new generation of smaller reactors a fraction of the size of those at Vogtle. The hope is that these reactors would have a lower upfront price tag, making them a less risky investment for utilities. They might also be based on a design that could be repeated often, as opposed to custom-built, to reduce costs.
So far, however, none of these next-generation plants have been built, although projects are underway in Wyoming, Texas and Tennessee.
Some nuclear proponents and companies have blamed the sluggish pace on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which must approve new designs before they are built. Critics say that many of the regulations that the agency uses were designed for an earlier era and are no longer appropriate for advanced reactors that are designed to be less susceptible to meltdowns.
"This is an agency that needs be shaken up a bit," said Jacob DeWitte, chief executive of Oklo Inc., a startup that has developed a small advanced reactor that it plans to build at Idaho National Laboratory. He called the executive orders "incredibly exciting on multiple fronts."
In one executive order, Mr. Trump directed the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to undertake a "wholesale revision" of its rules within 18 months and reorganize itself in consultation with the so-called Department of Government Efficiency, the group formed by Elon Musk. That reorganization could include layoffs, the order said.
While Congress established the nuclear agency to be independent from the White House, Mr. Trump has sought to exert greater authority over independent agencies in recent months.
"The N.R.C. is assessing the executive orders and will comply with White House directives," said Scott Burnell, a spokesman for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. "We look forward to continuing to work with the administration, DOE and DOD on future nuclear programs."
The inside of the control room at Three Mile Island is filled with knobs and levers set into metal green modules that are arranged in a semicircle around the operator's chair. 
Skeptics of nuclear power fear that pressure from the White House could cause the agency to take shortcuts on safety. Since the partial meltdown of the Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania in 1979, in which there were no fatalities, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has ratcheted up safety requirements. While that has made it harder to build new plants, the country has also not experienced another major nuclear accident.
"Simply put, the U.S. nuclear industry will fail if safety is not made a priority," said Edwin Lyman, the director of nuclear power safety at the Union of Concerned Scientists and a frequent critic of the industry. He added that if another large radiological release were to occur, it would "destroy public trust in nuclear power and cause other nations to reject U.S. nuclear technology for decades to come."
Even a few nuclear companies and proponents have been nervous about a major shake-up at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. They note that the agency has already started streamlining its approval processes in response to bipartisan bills passed by Congress, and that a hasty reorganization could, paradoxically, end up delaying approvals for the nuclear companies that are in the process of getting permits.
"Our assessment is that N.R.C. is already making significant progress on reform," said Judi Greenwald, executive director of the Nuclear Innovation Alliance, a pronuclear think tank. "It is in everyone's interest that this progress continue and not be undermined by staffing cuts or upended by conflicting directives."
Another order calls on the secretary of energy to develop a plan to rebuild U.S. supplies of enriched uranium and other nuclear fuels, which in recent years have largely been imported from Russia.
But speeding up regulatory approvals won't be sufficient to revive the nuclear industry, some experts said. The first few reactors that do get built are likely to be enormously expensive, and some sort of government support would likely be required to help companies build reactors at a pace that could drive down costs.
To that end, one of the executive orders directs the Energy Department's Loan Programs Office, which currently has roughly $400 billion in lending authority, to make resources available for restarting shuttered nuclear plants and building new reactors. The order sets a goal of having 10 large reactors under construction by 2030.
Yet the loan office has lost more than half its staff this year after a wave of Trump administration layoffs and buyouts, and House Republicans have proposed cutting its budget. Those cuts could hobble a key program for financing new reactors. nuclear supporters have said.
"It's good to see the focus on building a series of proven large reactors as well as smaller newer designs," said Armond Cohen, executive director of the Clean Air Task Force, an environmental group that supports nuclear power. "But you need serious government financial support to make any of this happen, and get to commercial scale and lower costs. To support the administration's goals, Congress needs to boost support instead of gutting it."

The Trump administration is giving a $1 billion loan to help restart a nuclear plant at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania, boosting a project that aims to provide power to Microsoft's vast network of data centers.
The funding, announced by the Energy Department on Tuesday, would help restart Three Mile Island Unit 1, which shut down in 2019. The other unit at the site near Harrisburg, Pa., shut down in 1979 after its reactor had a partial meltdown and released a small amount of radioactive material into the air. It was the most serious nuclear power accident in the country's history.
The plant became synonymous with the dangers of nuclear power and fueled public opposition to new nuclear projects for decades, even as safer reactors were developed.
Last year, Unit 1 became the face of a potential revival of the nuclear power industry when Microsoft and Constellation, Unit 1's owner, announced a deal to restart the plant.
Nuclear energy is one of the options large technology companies like Microsoft are considering to help power the vast networks of data centers needed to provide all kinds of computing services, from social media to artificial intelligence. Google and Amazon have also signed deals with nuclear operators and developers.
Attitudes toward nuclear power have softened in the United States, and it has political support among both Republicans and Democrats. The industry's supporters have said that the U.S. regulatory system drives up the cost of construction. China has leapfrogged the United States in nuclear power, and while it has similar safety standards, its approval system is more predictable.
The Trump administration has said it wants to reduce regulations at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which certifies that a reactor is safe before it is built. President Trump signed an executive order in May directing the agency to take no more than 18 months to approve applications for new reactors.
The Three Mile Island restart project would "help ensure America has the energy it needs to grow its domestic manufacturing base and win the AI race," Energy Secretary Chris Wright said in a statement on Tuesday. Constellation said the loan has "made it possible for us to vastly expedite this restart without compromising quality or safety."
Under the deal to revive the plant, Microsoft would buy as much power as it can from the plant for 20 years in an effort to add carbon-free electricity to the grids that power its operations.
Neither Constellation nor the Energy Department provided details of the loan or its terms. But Constellation said the loan would help it secure cheaper financing. The revived plant, named the Crane Clean Energy Center, is expected to come online in 2027, pending approvals from regulators, the company said in September. With 500 full-time employees, the site is 80 percent staffed, it said.
Once online, the 835-megawatt reactor will produce enough electricity to power roughly 800,000 homes, according to the Energy Department.
In addition to the technical challenges of restarting a mothballed nuclear plant, there are lingering safety concerns. In August 2024, about a dozen people opposed to the plant's reopening protested outside its gates.

In the flatlands of Eastern England, truck after truck rolls through the country lanes. Temporary fences block off farmers' fields. Archaeologists sift for artifacts.
The source of the disruption is a vast gash in the landscape near the town of Leiston running through hills to a pebbly beach on the North Sea.
A giant nuclear power station called Sizewell C, whose potential construction has loomed over the region for years, is now finally underway. By around 2040, Sizewell C, which will consist of two large reactors, is expected to produce enough electricity to light up six million homes.
An activist group called Stop Sizewell C, led by Alison Downes, has campaigned vigorously against the plant, but government backing made it hard to stop. It will sit on the beach next to a striking blue building with a white dome that houses Sizewell B, the last nuclear power station built in Britain, a project that was completed in 1995.
The stepped-up activity is a milestone for Julia Pyke, Sizewell's joint managing director and the public face of the giant project.
Ms. Pyke left the London law firm Herbert Smith Freehills Kramer, where she was a co-head of the firm's power practice, in 2017 to help assemble the financial package that pushed Sizewell C over the line. The estimated price tag is 38 billion pounds, or about $51 billion.
"We have demonstrated that there is high appetite to invest in nuclear," Ms. Pyke said in an interview in her London office.
Ms. Pyke said she encountered widespread skepticism when she began fund-raising for the project, but nuclear energy's star has risen. "Attitudes have shifted significantly, for a whole variety of reasons," she said.
Among them is the expectation that the growth of data centers for artificial intelligence, as well as adoption of electric vehicles, will raise demand for electricity in Britain and continental Europe.
Building nuclear plants also fits with the strategy of the British government, which wants to phase out natural gas. Ed Miliband, the energy secretary, blames Britain's reliance on fossil fuels for stubbornly high utility bills.
It's not lost on the government that Sizewell C will also help create thousands of well-paid jobs, including an estimated 8,000 at the peak of the construction phase.
Nuclear plants also provide a steady source of power, known as base load. These plants do not have the drawbacks of wind turbines or solar panels, whose output varies with the breeze and sunlight.
With power fluctuations associated with renewable energy, substantial base load is necessary "so that when the wind doesn't blow and the sun doesn't shine, the lights still go on," said Chris O'Shea, the chief executive of Centrica, a large British utility that has taken a 15 percent stake in the power station.
Yet Britain's existing nuclear fleet, now just five reactors, is dwindling fast because of age. All but Sizewell B are likely to be retired by the early 2030s.
Ms. Pyke managed to persuade business executives, government officials and financiers that it was sensible to embark on building more nuclear plants despite the difficult recent history of such efforts.
Ms. Pyke has had a firsthand view of that experience. As a lawyer, she represented Électricité de France, the French state-controlled utility that acquired Britain's operating nuclear plants and potential sites for £12.5 billion in 2009.
That deal led EDF to begin constructing a nuclear power station at Hinkley Point on England's West Coast. That plant, due to come online in the early 2030s, is years behind schedule and likely to be the costliest of the recent generation of nuclear plants.
Ms. Pyke sees virtues in EDF's struggles, saying that the French utility had to make thousands of changes in the reactor design at Hinkley Point to adapt to British regulations. EDF also had to train a local work force and develop a network of suppliers.
Ms. Pyke and her colleagues say that by replicating the work at Hinkley Point, they can lower the costs at Sizewell C.
To a great extent, the companies and people who are building Hinkley Point will also construct Sizewell. Nigel Cann, Ms. Pyke's co-managing director, is a former senior Hinkley manager.
Even with the promises of cost savings, no one wanted to take the risk of spending tens of billions of pounds upfront. Sizewell and government officials decided to use a financing model that will allow the owners of the plant to earn money on their costs during construction. The plan will cost households an average of £1 a month on their utility bills, Ms. Pyke said.
Because construction times can span a decade or longer and financial risks can mount, nuclear plants outside North America tend to be built by governments. But Sizewell has managed to attract a few large investors through terms intended to address fears of delays, cost overruns and other snafus that have plagued recent projects.
The arrangement includes returns on capital, potentially above 12 percent, with protection from inflation. The British government is also shielding investors from large cost overruns and other risks.
"We see a case that can achieve a return in the low teens," said Jamie Hossain, investment director of Amber Infrastructure, a fund management firm in London that plans to take a 7.6 percent share and potentially more.
Other investors include La Caisse, the pension fund manager of the Canadian province of Quebec, which has agreed to a 20 percent stake. The British government will initially own 44.9 percent of the plant
EDF will hold a 12.5 percent stake, and French state companies like Framatome will supply much of the critical nuclear equipment.
The "very generous" terms highlight both the difficulties of "attracting private capital to projects of this nature" and the increasing importance of nuclear power, wrote Deepa Venkateswaran, an analyst at Bernstein, a Wall Street research firm.
Some analysts are skeptical about whether the plant will make a major contribution to the government's aims of lowering costs for consumers and preparing the power grid for more renewable energy.
Because Sizewell C is unlikely to come online until the late 2030s, it won't change the dynamics of the power system soon. Even though it may turn out to be cheaper than Hinkley Point, analysts say it will still be costly.
"It's better than Hinkley Point C, but that is really not saying much," said Ben Hopkinson, head of housing and infrastructure at the Center for Policy Studies, a research organization in London.
Even though Sizewell C is years from generating electricity, it is already having an impact on the towns and villages in the area.
ith workers moving to the region, some rentals have increased more than 20 percent, said Aarran Ellis, managing director of Jennie Jones, a real estate agency in Saxmundham, a town near the construction site.
Some of the renters are newcomers to the area, he said, but "there are a lot of locals that are now working for Sizewell that can afford a little bit more."
Inevitably, people who cherished the quiet rural atmosphere of this part of England dread the prospect of years of disturbance.
"There's so many road closures and road works going on that people can't actually get here," said Tom Lagden, the owner of the Theberton Lion, a pub about five miles from the construction site.
To keep traffic out of the towns, Sizewell is building so-called relief roads across nearby farmland. David Boden sold around 20 acres of his family's farm to make way for one of these routes, figuring that making a deal was better than fighting the project in court.
But he thinks that his family now faces years of disruption. They moved to the farm partly because it was "out of the way," he said, adding, "Unfortunately, the road's come to us."

The Trump administration on Tuesday announced a plan to build several new nuclear power plants in what it described as an $80 billion deal to use reactors developed by Westinghouse Electric Company.
It's a big bet on an energy source that utilities and nuclear companies have struggled to develop in the United States over the last several decades, largely because of its high cost and long and complicated construction schedules. But the projected robust growth in electricity demand from data centers for artificial intelligence has encouraged politicians and energy and technology executives to take another look at nuclear power.
The new deal is a partnership involving the federal government, Westinghouse, Brookfield Asset Management and Cameco, a supplier of uranium fuel. Westinghouse is jointly owned by Brookfield and Cameco.
"This historic partnership with America's leading nuclear company will help unleash President Trump's grand vision to fully energize America and win the global A.I. race," said the energy secretary, Chris Wright. "President Trump promised a renaissance of nuclear power, and now he is delivering."
Under the administration's plan, the new projects would use Westinghouse's AP1000, a reactor most recently used in the United States at a power plant in Georgia. The two reactors built there were the first new ones the country has built in decades.
The AP1000 reactor was supposed to lead a nuclear renaissance in the early 2000s with plans for roughly two dozen new reactors across the country. But just two, at the Alvin W. Vogtle Electric Generating Plant in Waynesboro, Ga., near Augusta, made it to the finish line at a cost of about $35 billion - more than $20 billion more than initial estimates. The reactors were finished years later than planned.
Problems with the construction of those reactors were so severe that Westinghouse, then owned by the Japanese company Toshiba, filed for bankruptcy protection in 2017.
Various other projects failed, sometimes leaving utility customers on the hook for billions of dollars in costs.
This time, the nuclear plans have the backing of the wealthiest industry on the planet - the technology sector, which needs enormous amounts of energy to support its artificial intelligence ambitions. Nuclear power has also been embraced by some liberals and environmentalists on the grounds that reactors do not emit greenhouse gases, unlike natural gas or coal.
In California, Gov. Gavin Newsom supported extending the life of the Diablo Canyon Power Plant - the last nuclear power plant in the state - and received aid from the Biden administration for it.
Big Tech is also backing the development of small modular reactors, conducting research into fusion power, reopening shuttered plants and extending the life of existing units.
Google entered into an agreement on Monday to buy power from a shuttered nuclear power plant in Iowa that its owner, NextEra, an energy company, plans to restart in 2029. Last year, Microsoft agreed to foot the bill to restart a reactor at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania, the site of a cooling failure that led to the partial meltdown of a reactor in 1979.
Critics of nuclear projects contend that new reactors are expensive compared with renewable energy sources like solar and wind power. They questioned how the $80 billion would be used and who would fund it; the Trump administration and Westinghouse have provided few details about their plans.
"The $80 billion is intended to absorb the excess cost of nuclear," said Mark Cooper, an economic analyst at the Institute for Energy and the Environment at the Vermont Law and Graduate School. "Westinghouse has to find a buyer. There are no buyers at the current price. They still don't recognize that wind and solar are much cheaper."
The United States leads the world in nuclear energy production and played a central role in the technology's development. But in the last few decades it has fallen far behind China, which is building so many reactors that it is expected to have the largest nuclear power capacity by 2030.
Connor Teskey, president of Brookfield Asset Management, said in a statement that working with the federal government would "help unlock the potential that Westinghouse and nuclear energy can play to accelerate the growth of artificial intelligence in the United States, while meeting growing electricity demand and energy security needs at scale."
Many of the reactors that China has built in recent years are a version of Westinghouse's AP1000. That country plans to add dozens of reactors, which would bring it closer to the total number of reactors in the U.S. nuclear power plant fleet of more than 90.
Other countries have also been pushing for more nuclear power plants.
On Tuesday, Japan's trade ministry unveiled a list of domestic companies interested in starting projects as part of the $550 billion investment fund that Japan agreed to establish with the United States. The projects included artificial intelligence and a nuclear reactor construction initiative that was expected to be worth up to $100 billion and involve Mitsubishi Heavy and Toshiba.
River Akira Davis contributed reporting.

 "You have to go see the waste - did you see the waste?" Isabelle Boemeke shouted into the wind, which whipped her long, dark braid behind her as she stood on the California shoreline in San Luis Obispo.
The waste in question was the leftover uranium rods from producing nuclear energy, which are stored in thick casks of steel and concrete to keep them, at least theoretically, safely away from human beings.
Ms. Boemeke once kissed one of these casks.
In the distance behind her, occasionally visible behind the thick sea fog, was Diablo Canyon Power Plant, a nuclear power facility situated on a cartoonishly beautiful stretch of coastline.
Dressed in a blazer with sharp pointed shoulders and asymmetrical silver earrings, Ms. Boemeke looked like the heroine of a dystopian novel set sometime in the future. (A future where Prada is still making loafers - more than slightly impractical for the rocky terrain.)
Several of the plant's employees looked on, alert.
In 2020, Ms. Boemeke, a Brazilian model who has posed for brands including Cult Gaia, began posting on social media as Isodope, a persona she created for her nuclear advocacy work. On Isodope's Instagram and TikTok pages, Ms. Boemeke uses familiar influencer tropes like "get ready with me" videos, fitness regimens and beauty routines.
The point is to make nuclear energy appear cool while rendering high-level concepts digestible for a mainstream, very online audience. Ms. Boemeke has explained fusion and fission using Legos, and compared uranium pellets (which she also calls "magic spicy rocks") to gummy bears, for scale.
The question is: Why?
Becoming a Nuclear Energy Influencer
Ms. Boemeke says she has never taken money from the industry, though she has invested in Alva Energy, a start-up that aims to "add six gigawatts of new nuclear capacity to the U.S. grid in under five years," according to its website.
And last fall, Ms. Boemeke donated $5 million, and pledged an additional $5 million, to nuclear causes with her husband, Joe Gebbia, one of the most prominent members of the Trump administration's Department of Government Efficiency and the billionaire co-founder of Airbnb. A friend and confidant of Elon Musk's, Mr. Gebbia now sits on the board of Tesla.
The couple lives in Austin, Texas, with their 2-year-old son.
"We keep things very separate," Ms. Boemeke said of her husband's politics. (Mr. Gebbia did not respond to requests for comment.)
As Ms. Boemeke tells it, she was drawn to learning more about nuclear energy after experiencing climate anxiety in 2019, as wildfires ravaged the Amazon in her home country. She had been in the process of founding a cosmetics company, but said that the work didn't feel "like my calling."
Ms. Boemeke said the idea to become a nuclear influencer came to her while brushing her teeth during a 10-day water fast at a clinic in Spain, in a moment of hunger-induced clarity.
As bipartisan support for nuclear energy has gained momentum in recent years, both the Biden and the Trump administrations have outlined plans to expand nuclear energy in the United States. And last year six more countries joined a growing pledge to triple the world's use of nuclear power - once a taboo subject in climate talks - by 2050.
On TikTok and Instagram, Ms. Boemeke as her alter ego Isodope, posts videos about uranium pellets, fission and other subjects related to nuclear power.
But the energy source continues to have many vocal opponents, including those with worries about safety. Some experts find Ms. Boemeke to be an ominous messenger for this cause - and the message itself to be dubious, too.
Edwin Lyman, director of nuclear power safety for the Union of Concerned Scientists, described Ms. Boemeke as "another cog in the whole wheel of the nuclear power influence machine that's trying to change public opinion and the opinion of policymakers about nuclear power, its prospects, its safety in the intent to try to stimulate growth for the industry."
In December 2021, Ms. Boemeke helped organize a rally to save the power plant she was visiting this summer afternoon, which the utility Pacific Gas & Electric had planned to shutter in 2025 to shift focus to renewable energy sources.
Linda Seeley, vice president of Mothers for Peace, a nonprofit organization that has protested against nuclear power for decades, said the group had filed lawsuits in an effort to close the Diablo Canyon plant.
"If nuclear power were clean, if it didn't leave waste that is lethal for the next 240,000 years, we would be fine with it," said Ms. Seeley, who lives in Los Osos, just up the coast from the plant. "The problem is that is the consequence of having a nuclear reaction. It's beyond me how on earth some young people can take up this banner as their cause."
Ms. Boemeke and her husband, Joe Gebbia, at an event celebrating scientific achievements in April. Mr. Gebbia works in the Trump administration's Department of Government Efficiency and is a close friend of Elon Musk's.Credit...Phillip Faraone/Getty Images
'Skimming Is Encouraged'
All of this may sound outlandish, but Ms. Boemeke has some influential figures in her corner.
Her book, "Rad Future: The Untold Story of Nuclear Electricity and How It Will Save the World," is out on Tuesday with Thesis, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group. Leading up to its release, Diplo posted his book swag in an Instagram story. Gwyneth Paltrow feted Ms. Boemeke in the Hamptons, posing alongside Ms. Boemeke holding a copy of the book. (Ms. Paltrow is thanked in the acknowledgments as "GP.")
In "Rad Future," Ms. Boemeke takes a conversational tone akin to that of theSkimm, the voice-y, female-founded newsletter that became popular for simplifying the day's news into bite-size tidbits.
Indeed, Ms. Boemeke writes, "skimming is encouraged."
"I'm like a huge science nerd," Ms. Boemeke said in an interview in a conference room at the nuclear plant, rattling off facts about the waste casks.
Her publicist hovered nearby, silently overseeing the conversation.
 "I'm like a huge science nerd," said Ms. Boemeke, 35.Credit...JJ Geiger for The New York Times
Earlier, Ms. Boemeke had arrived at Diablo Canyon in a black Sprinter van accompanied by a small team, including her chief of staff, a makeup artist and a social media editor.
Also in tow was Carolyn Porco, a planetary scientist and nuclear advocate whose posts online about nuclear energy caught Ms. Boemeke's eye a decade ago. Over the past few years, they became friends. Dr. Porco, who lives near the power plant, was there to offer Ms. Boemeke "moral support," Ms. Boemeke's team said.
"There are those who say, 'Oh, what would a model know about nuclear energy?'" Dr. Porco said. But Ms. Boemeke, she added, was "the real deal."
Jacopo Buongiorno, a nuclear science and engineering professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said he had gotten to know Ms. Boemeke after meeting virtually during the pandemic.
Dr. Buongiorno, who is also the director of M.I.T.'s Center for Advanced Nuclear Energy Systems, said in a phone interview that he was struck by her curiosity. "Her style is great for her intended audience, and she does her homework," he said.
But it's not difficult to find others who are skeptical of Ms. Boemeke's work.
"I just don't see what she has to contribute to the argument," said David Schlissel, co-founder of the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, an energy research firm.
Mr. Schlissel said other existing technology options, like battery storage and renewable energy, offered cheaper, faster solutions to reducing carbon emissions.
"If some rich people want to bear all of the risks of the new nuclear technology, let them - but that's not the way it's working out," he added. "They want governments to bear the risks, meaning you and me as taxpayers in the U.S. and electric rate payers."
Without having read her book, Dr. Lyman, of the Union of Concerned Scientists, guessed that Ms. Boemeke - like some nuclear proponents, he said - had probably provided an alternative telling of the Chernobyl disaster.
In "Rad Future," Ms. Boemeke argues that while Chernobyl "was not a glowing success story for nuclear electricity," avoiding nuclear energy because of it "makes as much sense as avoiding cruise ships because of the Titanic."
Leaving the conference room, Ms. Boemeke and her team hopped into their van and headed past the plant to the water's edge to pose for pictures. The fall after the rally Ms. Boemeke organized, Gov. Gavin Newsom of California signed a law creating a pathway for Pacific Gas and Electric Company to continue its operations at the site, and the plant, California's last operational nuclear outfit, now has an extension until 2030.
On the drive there, through layers of fences, one could indeed see the nuclear waste that got Ms. Boemeke so excited.
"It's not a gag or a meme for the day," said Ms. Seeley, the Mothers for Peace vice president. "This is the future of the earth we're talking about."
"If it weren't so dangerous," she added, "I would just feel sad for her."

A record-breaking heat wave in Europe is warming up the river water that some nuclear power plants use for cooling, prompting operators to shut down at least three reactors at two separate sites.
Late on Sunday, operators shut down one of the two reactors at the Golfech Nuclear Power Plant in southern France after forecasts that the Garonne River, from which it draws water, could top 28 degrees Celsius, or roughly 82 degrees Fahrenheit.
The Beznau Nuclear Power Plant in Switzerland, built along the Aare River near the country's northern border, followed suit, shutting down one of its reactors on Tuesday and the other on Wednesday.
Both plants are designed to keep their reactors at safe temperatures by cooling them with river water, which is then pumped back out at higher temperatures. Regulations in both countries require operators to reduce energy production when the rivers get too hot, in order to protect downstream environments.
The operator of the Beznau plant, Axpo, said that "excessive warming of the already-warm river water during hot summer periods is to be prevented in order not to place additional strain on flora and fauna." In a statement, Axpo confirmed that a limit of 25 degrees Celsius had been exceeded for several days in a row.
Other river-cooled nuclear reactors, including one at the Bugey plant in southeastern France, have reduced their power generation. Temperatures across Europe have regularly exceeded 100 degrees Fahrenheit this week, though forecasters say relief is on the way over the weekend.
When most reactors in the United States and Europe were built, mainly from the 1960s into the 1980s, they were not designed with climate change in mind. As global temperatures have risen, precautionary power plant shutdowns because of heat have increased in frequency.
While energy losses are typically low, a 2024 report by Cour des Comptes, an administrative court in France that audits and helps to regulate government spending, found that the country may see the amount of electricity lost because of climate-related shutdowns triple or quadruple by 2050.
Nuclear power is France's top source of energy, with the country's 18 nuclear plants providing nearly two-thirds of the country's electricity needs. In Switzerland, nuclear power accounts for roughly a third of all energy consumed.

Neither this week's shutdown in France nor the one in Switzerland was expected to have significant effects on power generation.
"The Swiss power grid remains stable," an Axpo statement said. "Other generation capacities, particularly hydropower plants, are able to compensate for the temporary shutdown of the Beznau Nuclear Power Plant." Local reports indicated that the French grid operator also expected to have sufficient supply to meet energy demand.
In 2022, however, a heat wave, coupled with a drop in generating capacity, prompted France's nuclear authority to temporarily relax its rules regulating the maximum downstream temperature of water discharge. Similarly, in Switzerland, the Beznau plant continued operating during that year's hot temperatures.
"This is the first time that the plant has had to be shut down due to water temperature," a representative of the Swiss Federal Office of Energy said. "In 2022, despite excessively warm water in the Aare River, the plant continued to produce electricity because the electricity supply situation did not allow for a shutdown."
The Swiss energy office added that a temporary reduction in production had occurred "several times in recent years."
All nuclear power plants take in and release water, but the amount varies based on their design.
Many plants and animals are sensitive to thermal pollution, which occurs when human activity changes the temperature of natural bodies of water, like rivers. Warmer water holds less oxygen and becomes more susceptible to algal blooms. When power plants suddenly begin operating or turn off, fish can be killed from the sudden changes in temperature.
Effects on wildlife aren't the only risk that heat waves pose to nuclear power plants. If the water they take in is too hot to begin with, it may not be effective in cooling reactors, making operation unsafe. In 2012, a nuclear plant in Waterford, Conn., was shut down when the surrounding bay became too hot to keep the site cool.
According to Marcus Amme, a member of the European Nuclear Society's High Scientific Council, all of Switzerland's nuclear power plants have safety certifications, required by Switzerland's nuclear regulatory authority, that confirm their facilities can withstand heat waves with a maximum air temperature of at least 40 degrees Celsius, or 104 degrees Fahrenheit.

New York is planning to build a nuclear power plant capable of producing enough electricity for as many as a million homes in an as-yet-unnamed upstate location, Gov. Kathy Hochul said on Monday.
Ms. Hochul said the plant, which would produce half as much power as the Indian Point complex north of New York City that was shut down four years ago, would help avert the "rolling blackouts" that have plagued some other states. She did not say how much the project would cost or how long it would take to complete but said that New York would seek investment from the private sector.
The governor said that safety would be "at the forefront" of the state's planning and that the new plant would meet rigorous environmental standards.
"This is not your grandparents' nuclear reactor. You're not going to see this in a movie starring Jane Fonda," she said, referring to "China Syndrome," the 1979 movie about a nuclear meltdown.
Nuclear power has enjoyed a resurgence of interest from states and companies in recent years, in part because the plants don't produce the greenhouse gases that are rapidly heating the planet, and they can run at all hours, unlike wind and solar power.
Tech giants like Amazon, Google and Microsoft have begun investing in nuclear power to help meet soaring electricity demand from their A.I. data centers. States like Illinois, Montana and Wisconsin have lifted longstanding bans on the construction of new nuclear plants. Texas this month approved a $350 million fund to build new reactors.
That's a sharp turnaround from a decade ago, when New York, Michigan, Pennsylvania and California were beginning to retire their older reactors, a move that many lawmakers now say was a mistake.
In 2021, Indian Point, a two-gigawatt nuclear plant in Westchester County, shut down under pressure from then-Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who said that having the plant close to a large population center defied "basic sanity." The plant's shutdown meant that New York had to burn more fossil fuels like natural gas for electricity, and the state's grid operator has postponed plans to close some of its older gas-burning plants in order to avoid blackouts.
While efforts are currently underway to restart previously closed plants in Michigan and Pennsylvania, experts say that Indian Point is very likely to be too far along in the process of being dismantled to reopen.
Ms. Hochul, who was lieutenant governor at the time Indian Point shut down, has since criticized Mr. Cuomo for not having a sustainable "Plan B" for replacing the plant's output, which amounted to as much as 25 percent of the electricity consumed by New York City.
She said that in recent meetings with President Trump, she had pressed him to make the federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission more efficient so that permits for a new plant could be obtained in less than 10 years.
Last month, Mr. Trump signed a series of executive orders aimed at speeding up the development of new nuclear power plants by ordering the commission, the nation's independent nuclear safety regulator, to ease the process for approving new plants.
New York still derives about one-fifth of its electricity from three nuclear plants operated by Constellation Energy on the south shore of Lake Ontario. In January, Constellation and the New York State Research and Development Authority sought federal funding for their effort to obtain permits for one or more advanced reactors at the Nine Mile Point Clean Energy Center in Oswego County.
The New York Power Authority, the state-owned utility, will manage the project that the governor announced Monday. Ms. Hochul said that the state had already begun identifying potential "host communities" for the new plant, but did not provide any names. "Everybody's raising their hand right now," she said. "It's going to be hard to decide."
Only three new reactors have come online in the United States in the last 30 years, and many utilities have been deterred by the high price tag. The two most recent reactors built in Georgia cost $35 billion, double the initial estimates. While some companies hope that a new generation of smaller reactors could prove cheaper to build, they remain unproven.
Randy Wolken, chief executive of the Manufacturers Association of Central New York, said Ms. Hochul's announcement would be "a pivot point for the future" of manufacturing in the state. He cited Micron Technology's plan to build computer-chip factories near Syracuse as one of several developments that will require significant amounts of emissions-free energy.
The effort to build new nuclear power plants is likely to face opposition from some environmental groups, who would prefer that the state focus on building wind and solar power and who dismiss nuclear power as too costly.
The power authority "should be laser focused on rapidly scaling up their build-out of affordable solar and wind which is the only way to meet the state's science-based climate goals and lower energy bills," said the Public Power NY coalition, which is made up of advocacy groups that have pushed the state to build publicly owned renewable energy.
State Senator Liz Krueger, a Democrat, raised a number of concerns about Governor Hochul's plan in a statement. "Is it the most cost-effective use of our clean energy dollars," she asked. "Can the radioactive material be disposed of in a satisfactory way?"
"I have yet to see any real-world examples of new nuclear development for which all of these questions can be answered in the affirmative, and I am skeptical that I ever will," Ms. Krueger wrote.
Patrick McGeehan is a Times reporter who covers the economy of New York City and its airports and other transportation hubs.

On a leafy campus in eastern China, crews are working day and night to finish a mammoth round structure with two sweeping arms the length of aircraft carriers.
On former rice fields in the country's southwest, a hulking, X-shaped building is being built with equal urgency under great secrecy. That facility's existence wasn't widely known until researchers spotted it in satellite images a year or so ago.
Together, the colossal projects are China's most ambitious efforts yet to harness an energy source that could transform civilization: fusion.
Fusion, the melding together of atoms to release extraordinary energy, uses fuels that are plentiful, carries no risk of meltdowns and leaves no long-lived radioactive waste. It promises near-limitless energy that might not only satisfy the surging demand for electricity to power artificial intelligence but also end reliance on the fossil fuels that are perilously overheating the planet.
Scientists first mused a century ago about fusion, the energy of the stars. In recent decades, they have made major strides toward reproducing the process in the laboratory using magnets and lasers. Yet forcing unruly atoms to combine is vastly more difficult than splitting them, as in the fission process that produces nuclear power today.
A fusion reactor must first heat hydrogen to temperatures hotter than the sun, turning it into plasma, the fourth state of matter. Then it needs to hold this violent plasma together for long enough that the atoms fuse and disgorge energy. China, the United States and other countries are now racing to develop the machines that can pull all this off and survive to do it again and again, reliably enough to power a grid.
The world's two superpowers are in a tightening contest to dominate the energy future. Under the Trump administration, the U.S. is intent on producing oil, gas and coal and selling it abroad. Its chief economic rival, China, has become the world's dominant supplier of clean energy in the form of solar panels, batteries and electric vehicles.
Fusion could change the calculus for both nations and the globe. Whoever conquers it could build plants around the world and forge new alliances with energy-hungry countries. But the Americans and the Chinese have very different strategies for getting there.
The United States is counting on private industry and American innovation to deliver results, with government agencies providing targeted support. From coast to coast, a fleet of start-ups has brought new urgency and ingenuity to the quest.
On the other side of the world, China's government has made fusion a national priority, marshaling resources at daunting speed. Recently, a Shanghai start-up essentially matched an engineering breakthrough by America's best-funded fusion company, Commonwealth Fusion Systems, in much less time. Over the summer, the Chinese government and private investors poured $2.1 billion into a new state-owned fusion company. That investment alone is two and a half times the U.S. Energy Department's annual fusion budget.
The two countries' progress could soon be tested head-to-head.
Commonwealth says that by 2027, the experimental device it is building in Massachusetts will pull off a key feat: producing more energy than it takes to run. That would be a signal that fusion could someday generate electricity for data centers, steel mills and more.
China's leading plasma-physics lab is aiming for its new machine, which has the modest name of BEST and will sit in the twin-armed building in the country's east, to cross that milestone in the next few years, too.
"It's a very tight schedule," said Lian Hui, a scientist at the lab. Even so, "we are very confident we will be able to achieve BEST's research goals," he said.
The government's new five-year plan, covering 2026 through 2030, promises "extraordinary measures" to secure breakthroughs in fusion energy and other areas. China's state-owned nuclear company is preparing detailed fusion research proposals, calling it "the main racetrack in future scientific and technological competition among the great powers."

The country was a minnow in fusion only two decades ago, and it grew by teaming up with other nations. It worked closely with France to develop its most modern tokamak, a type of doughnut-shaped fusion machine. It became a key contributor to the 33-nation ITER fusion experiment (pronounced "eater"). During much of the past decade, American and Chinese researchers conducted joint experiments and extolled their nations' "long-term friendship" in plasma physics.
Now, Chinese labs and companies are pouring concrete for cutting-edge research facilities of their own. The Chinese Academy of Sciences' Institute of Plasma Physics is building both the new BEST tokamak and a 100-acre complex nearby where researchers will develop and test components to operate under the extreme conditions of a fusion device. Scientists there are also sketching out another tokamak that would power a pilot fusion plant in the 2030s and '40s.
Richard Pitts, a British-French physicist at ITER, visited the BEST site in January last year, when it was little more than an empty platform. Today, it's half finished.
China has learned a great deal from being part of ITER, and now it is applying that knowledge to make its own advances, Dr. Pitts said. "Every time I go there, I'm taken aback by the sheer numbers of people and the sheer efficiency with which things get done," he said.
Even if the core technology works, however, fusion reactors won't power the world until companies figure out how to build and operate them affordably and at industrial scale.
And on that front, China's expertise in engineering and construction gives it a distinct advantage, said Jimmy Goodrich, a senior fellow at the University of California Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation. "The risk for the United States is we create a viable technical pathway first, but then China engineers and scales it up before we can," Mr. Goodrich said.
Recently, Commonwealth got a glimpse at how quickly China is moving.
Last year, scientists with the company published academic papers describing one of their biggest accomplishments: the enormous, D-shaped magnets that will sit inside its new tokamak in Massachusetts. They are made with materials that carry electricity with exceptionally low resistance, allowing them to produce superstrong magnetic fields.
Then, this past summer, scientists with a Shanghai start-up, Energy Singularity, published a paper about their own, very similar magnet.
To Dennis Whyte, a Commonwealth co-founder, this was no mere feat of reverse engineering. Mobilizing the supply chains and manufacturing expertise needed to build and test such a magnet so quickly showed "really amazing skill," Dr. Whyte said.
In the southwest, another front in China's fusion ambitions is racing ahead with much less public fanfare.
Scientists at the China Academy of Engineering Physics, in Sichuan Province, studied attentively as their counterparts at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California toiled for years before achieving a tantalizing demonstration of fusion's potential. In late 2022, the lab's lasers caused a pellet of hydrogen to "ignite," meaning the reaction produced more energy than the energy from the lasers.
Livermore's achievement marked "a major scientific breakthrough that will be memorialized in the annals of human history," Zheng Wanguo said in an interview in early 2023. China, he said, should "strengthen investment and research" in fusion energy, "taking laser fusion ignition as the main technical approach."
Within a year and a half, an enormous X-shaped facility had arisen outside the city of Mianyang.
Chinese laser industry reports, scientific papers and a patent application suggest the site will house Shenguang IV, a new laser ignition facility. Proposals for such a facility, whose name means "Divine Light," go back in some form over 15 years. But the Livermore lab's success seemed to put it on the fast track.
The speed of construction in Mianyang is "breathtaking," said Livermore's director, Kimberly Budil, given that it took her lab 20 years to build its ignition facility and get it fully running. Still, "operating that system reliably and effectively over time takes meaningful skills, and these are all lessons China will have to learn along the way," Dr. Budil said.

Collaborate or Decouple
The U.S.-China divide in fusion was glaring to Alain Bécoulet, an eminent French physicist, when he was in Chengdu in October for the International Atomic Energy Agency's annual fusion conference. There were no Americans, Dr. Bécoulet said.
The Energy Department under President Trump had discouraged U.S. scientists from attending, three researchers told The Times. The department didn't respond to a request for comment.
"China is now innovative," said Dr. Bécoulet, the chief scientist at ITER. "It's not simply copying or redoing."
China's Institute of Plasma Physics announced in November that it welcomed partnerships with foreign scientists using its new BEST tokamak. "The door is always open," said Dong Shaohua, who manages the institute's overseas collaborations.
But, as energy security becomes increasingly vital to industries like A.I., many in American government and industry now see fusion as a win-or-lose battlefield for global influence.

"Whoever wins and gets it together sets the foundation for the rest of the century," said Ylli Bajraktari, head of the Special Competitive Studies Project, a research organization in Washington.
The Energy Department in October released a new road map for helping the fusion industry grow and commercialize in the 2030s. The document calls for the building and upgrading of several scientific facilities. But it does away with an earlier initiative by the department to lead the design and construction of a pilot fusion plant by the 2040s.
The reason, according to the department, is that American start-ups are already moving quickly toward erecting such a plant.
To some scientists, the U.S. government needs to do more.
Investors have poured about $14 billion into fusion companies worldwide, with $7.6 billion of that going to American firms. "That's a lot of money, but it's going to take a whole lot more of that to get this across the finish line," said George Tynan, a plasma scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Chang Liu worked for years as a physicist at the Energy Department's Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. Recently, Dr. Liu tried to recruit some younger scientists for his team, but the lab said it didn't have the budget, he said. Experiences like this, plus family reasons, led him to move to Peking University, one of China's best. A Princeton spokeswoman said the lab didn't comment on personnel matters.
In America, the lack of government support is one reason so many fusion researchers are joining start-ups, Dr. Liu said.
Chinese officials, by contrast, are putting significant resources into a possible "ultimate solution" to humankind's energy needs, he said. "They can really invest in things that are important," he said.
Li You contributed research from Hefei, China.

The Trump administration is considering several executive orders aimed at speeding up the construction of nuclear power plants to help meet rising electricity demand, according to drafts reviewed by The New York Times
The draft orders say the United States has fallen behind China in expanding nuclear power and call for a "wholesale revision" of federal safety regulations to make it easier to build new plants. They envision the Department of Defense taking a prominent role in ordering reactors and installing them on military bases.
They would also set a goal of quadrupling the size of the nation's fleet of nuclear power plants, from nearly 100 gigawatts of electric capacity today to 400 gigawatts by 2050. One gigawatt is enough to power nearly 1 million homes.
"As American development of new nuclear reactor designs has waned, 87 percent of nuclear reactors installed worldwide since 2017 are based on Russian and Chinese designs," reads one draft order, titled "Ushering In a Nuclear Renaissance."
"These trends cannot continue," the order reads. "Swift and decisive action is required to jump-start America's nuclear renaissance."
The four draft orders are marked "pre-decisional" and "deliberative." They are among several potential executive orders on nuclear power that have been circulating but it is not clear which, if any, might be issued, according to a person familiar with the discussions, who spoke on a condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
It also was not immediately clear who had written the draft orders or what stage of internal administration discussions the documents reflected. The White House declined to comment on whether any orders would ultimately be issued.
In one of his first acts in office, President Trump declared a "national energy emergency," saying that America had inadequate supplies of electricity to meet the country's growing needs, particularly for data centers that run artificial intelligence systems. While most of Mr. Trump's actions have focused on boosting fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas, administration officials have also supported nuclear power.
"Our goal is to bring in tens of billions of dollars during this administration in private capital to get reactors built, and I'm highly confident we will achieve that goal," Chris Wright, the energy secretary, said at a hearing before a House appropriations subcommittee on Wednesday.
In recent years, nuclear power has been attracting growing bipartisan support. Some Democrats endorse it because the plants don't emit planet-warming greenhouse gases, although environmentalists have raised concerns about radioactive waste and reactor safety. It also gets backing from Republicans who are less concerned about global warming but who say nuclear power plants could strengthen U.S. energy security.
Tech companies like Google, Microsoft and Amazon that have ambitious climate goals have expressed interest in nuclear power to fuel their data centers, since the plants can run 24 hours a day, something wind and solar power can't do.
Yet building new reactors in the United States has proved enormously difficult.
While the nation still has the world's largest fleet of nuclear power plants, only three new reactors have come online since 1996. Many utilities have been scared off by the high cost. The two most recent reactors built at the Vogtle nuclear power plant in Georgia cost $35 billion, double the initial estimates, and arrived seven years behind schedule.
In response, more than a dozen companies have begun developing a new generation of smaller reactors a fraction of the size of those at Vogtle. The hope is that these reactors would have a lower upfront price tag, making them a less risky investment for utilities. That, in turn, could help the industry reduce costs by repeatedly building the same type of reactor.
So far, however, none of these next-generation plants have been built.
One of the draft executive orders blames the sluggish pace at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the independent federal agency that oversees reactor safety and must approve new designs before they are built. The draft would order the agency to undertake a "wholesale revision" of its regulations and impose a deadline of 18 months for deciding whether to approve a new reactor.
The draft order also urges the agency to reconsider its safety limits for radiation exposure, saying that current limits are too strict and go beyond what is needed to protect human health.
It is unclear whether the president could order sweeping changes at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which Congress established to be independent from the White House. In recent months, Mr. Trump has sought to exert greater authority over independent agencies, setting up a potential showdown in the courts.
Some pronuclear groups have said that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is already beginning to streamline its regulations in response to a bipartisan bill passed by Congress last year. But skeptics of nuclear power say they fear that pressure from the White House could cause the agency to cut corners on safety.
"That's my number one worry," said Edwin Lyman, the director of nuclear power safety at the Union of Concerned Scientists and a frequent critic of the industry. "We're talking about new reactor technologies where there's a lot of uncertainty, and the NRC staff often raise a lot of good technical questions. To short-circuit that process would mean sweeping potential safety issues under the rug."
The draft orders suggest other possible steps, including having the U.S. military use its deep pockets to finance next-generation reactors. One option under consideration would be to designate certain A.I. data centers as "defense critical infrastructure" and allow them to be powered by reactors built on Department of Energy facilities, which may allow projects to avoid review by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Another order would call on the secretary of energy to develop a plan to rebuild U.S. supply chains for enriched uranium and other nuclear fuels, which in recent years have largely been imported from Russia.
It remains to be seen whether such steps would be enough to usher in a wave of new reactors, experts said. Under the Biden administration, the Energy Department also made a major push to expand nuclear power in the United States, with some signs of progress. Yet some of the federal offices that led that effort are now being thinned out by firings, buyouts and budget cuts.
For instance, the Energy Department's Loan Programs Office, which provided nearly $12 billion in loan guarantees to help finance the Vogtle reactors, is poised to lose more than half its staff, according to several current and former employees. Those losses, pronuclear groups have said, could hobble a key program for financing new reactors.
"The big question is how you build up a big order book of new reactors so that costs start coming down and supply chains get built up," said Joshua Freed, who leads the climate and energy program at Third Way, a center-left think tank. "There are a lot of moving parts that have to come together."

The British government said on Tuesday that it would spend as much as 14.2 billion pounds, or about $19 billion, on constructing a nuclear power station, a project that is expected to create 10,000 jobs and help light up six million homes.
The decision likely means that the giant plant called Sizewell C, whose site on the East Suffolk coastline was first identified by the government in 2009, will receive a go-ahead. Much of the funding will come from the government.
EDF, the French state-owned energy group, will build the plant. According to a recent filing, it owns 12 percent of the project with the British government holding the rest. Britain hopes to attract other funding.
Nuclear power plants can cost tens of billions of dollars to build, but they have regained favor in recent years in Britain and elsewhere because they produce large volumes of steady electric power with few emissions. The plants are also viewed as a way to enhance energy security.
The emergence of artificial intelligence, with the growing demand for data centers to run those systems, has also raised the appeal of nuclear energy.
Nuclear power accounted for about 14 percent of Britain's electricity supply last year.
While announcing funding for the Sizewell plant, the British government also said it had chosen Rolls-Royce SMR, a unit of the aircraft engine maker, as the "preferred bidder" to build so-called small modular nuclear reactors in partnership with a state company called Great British Energy.
The government said it was planning to spend £2.5 billion on these smaller power plants, which are being designed to be largely built in factories rather than on work sites, theoretically cutting labor costs.
Britain also said it would spend a similar amount on nuclear fusion, a technology that could produce large volumes of clean energy if it ever reaches commercial viability.
"We need new nuclear to deliver a golden age of clean energy abundance," Britain's energy secretary, Ed Miliband, said in a statement.
EDF, the French utility, has experienced major challenges at the other large nuclear power plant under construction in Britain, known as Hinkley Point C, whose completion has been delayed many years while costs have soared. The final price tag could exceed £40 billion.
Proponents of Sizewell C say the experience of building Hinkley Point will lower the cost of the new plant. Still, the final price tag is likely to run into tens of billions of pounds.
But Alison Downes, a director at Stop Sizewell C, a group opposed to construction of the plant, said opponents were still hopeful that investors and future governments might shy away from such a costly undertaking. "This is a huge amount of cash for something that is for all intents and purposes a hugely risky proposition," she said.
The new plant will be near Sizewell B, which began operating in 1995 and was the last nuclear power station completed in Britain.
The country has a strong rating in nuclear research, but industry experts say that during its long hiatus, Britain's skills in nuclear construction atrophied, a key reason for the higher costs. The nuclear industry in the United States has also encountered cost overruns.
Still, the British government sees nuclear plants as an attractive option because electric power demand is expected to rise and the existing plants are aging and being gradually shut down.

Britain and the United States are expected to sign an agreement this week to help companies from one country to build nuclear projects in the other.
The British government is hopeful that reaching a deal with the United States will speed up what has, so far, been a halting effort to build nuclear plants in Britain. "Together with the U.S., we are building a golden age of nuclear," Prime Minister Keir Starmer said in a statement on Monday.
Mr. Starmer's government favors construction of more nuclear plants despite their drawbacks. These facilities come with huge price tags and other risks, but they produce large volumes of steady energy with low emissions.
The industry's advocates say that the benefits of having large domestic sources of power generation outweigh the negatives. "Replacing reliance on imports with domestic carbon-free power will contribute significantly to the U.K.'s energy security," said Vincent C. Zabielski, a partner at the law firm Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman in London who works on nuclear issues.
Building nuclear stations also creates jobs, an important consideration for the government, which is aligned with the trade unions. About 98,000 people already work in the industry in Britain, constructing, operating and decommissioning plants, according to the Nuclear Industry Association, a trade group.
Britain's existing nuclear plants are gradually reaching the end of their lives, and the country is struggling to add new ones. The last nuclear station to be completed, Sizewell B in Suffolk, began generating electricity in 1995.
The government's statement includes a number of early-stage nuclear deals, including a plan by X-Energy, an American firm, and Centrica, a British utility, to build up to 12 so-called advanced modular reactors at Hartlepool in North East England.
So far the most important aspect of the deal appears to be an effort to speed up the notoriously slow approval process for these projects by fast-tracking reviews of designs already approved in one jurisdiction.
For instance, a nuclear power station being built in western England called Hinkley Point C has encountered severe delays, partly because of thousands of required design changes from previous models of the same reactor built in Europe and China.
The deal with the United States, which is expected to be signed during President Trump's state visit this week, aims to cut at least some of this red tape.
The government estimated that the change could cut licensing time to two years, from as long as four. Cutting red tape would be useful because costs on planned projects have run into billions of pounds before construction has even started.
"It's really important because nuclear design assurance is incredibly expensive and incredibly cumbersome," said Adam Bell, a former British government energy official and now director of policy at Stonehaven, a consulting firm.
If each country can accept regulatory signoffs from the other, he added, "that enables us both to deploy nuclear much more quickly."
The government said the arrangement could help Rolls-Royce, the jet engine maker, speed up exports of the small modular nuclear reactor it is developing.

Britain will back a modular nuclear power station for Anglesey Island in northern Wales, ending years of uncertainty over the fate of what is considered the country's best nuclear site.
The decision, which was announced Thursday morning in London, appears to be an effort to create a British nuclear champion and a move to increase the government's role in the economy, especially the energy sector.
The Wales plant would also be the first of this type of nuclear plant to be built in Britain. Modular designs are promoted as cheaper and quicker to construct.
Rolls-Royce SMR, an affiliate of the jet engine maker that is one of Britain's few remaining large industrial companies, will design the power station at Wylfa, a rocky headland on the island that overlooks the Irish Sea.
Rolls-Royce is trying to parlay its experience designing and building the reactors for Britain's nuclear submarines into a new business line. It has brought in investors, including the Qatar Investment Authority, the Persian Gulf emirate's sovereign wealth fund; Constellation, an American utility; and CEZ, the Czech Republic's power company.
The Wales plant will consist of three units, known as small modular reactors, or SMRs, whose power output will add up to a little less than half that of one of the current generation of giant power stations.
These "mini-nuclear reactors are smaller and quicker to build" than some larger ones, the government said in a news release. The plan is to lower costs through assembling modules from components in factories and then setting them up on site.
The government is betting that these smaller reactors will give Britain a technology with low carbon emissions and "global export opportunities." It has pledged 2.5 billion pounds ($3.3 billion) for preliminary work on the site and other preparation. The additional cost of completing the plant may be financed through charges on electric bills, a strategy the government is using to draw investors to another plant, Sizewell C, being built in eastern England.
The government said the plant would support 3,000 local jobs and power three million homes. By comparison, Sizewell C is projected to create 8,000 jobs at peak construction and light six million homes.
The government, though, is taking something of a gamble. Small modular reactors like the one proposed by Rolls-Royce are relatively new in the global nuclear industry. Such leadership could bring both advantages and unexpected problems.
Britain, which is trying to construct nuclear plants after a long hiatus, has already been badly burned by delays and cost overruns at a giant plant being built on the west coast of England at Hinkley Point.
In addition, some critics say the government is making a mistake by not building a larger plant at Wylfa that would generate more electricity and create more jobs. The nuclear industry considers Wylfa the most advantageous of potential British sites because of its bedrock location and easy access to deep water for cooling.
In a statement on Wednesday, Unite, a large trade union, said building the small modular plant at Wylfa was "a missed opportunity."
The union said that although the smaller plant would provide "some employment opportunities," those from a larger model would be "far greater."
In addition, the choice is likely to disappoint Washington, an important ally, and the American nuclear industry, which has been courting Britain. The United States recently signed an ambitious nuclear cooperation deal with Britain.
"We are extremely disappointed by this decision, not least because there are cheaper, faster, and already-approved options to provide clean, safe energy at this same location," Warren Stephens, the U.S. ambassador to Britain, said in a statement.
The British government, though, is eager to move forward with small nuclear reactors and may have calculated that lining up an American giant would take years.
Keir Starmer, the prime minister, also probably wanted something to happen quickly at Wylfa, whose future has been in doubt since Hitachi walked away from building a power station there in 2019 after spending around £2 billion. A 1960s-era plant at Wylfa closed in 2015.
"It might simply be that Wylfa is the fastest site they can possibly bring online for SMRs, so they've gone for that," said Adam Bell, a former senior British energy official who is now director of policy at Stonehaven, a consulting firm.

Edward T. Jones, a senior lecturer in economics at Bangor University in North Wales, said the local community, which was stunned by Hitachi's departure, might not be prepared to cash in on the opportunities offered by the new plant. "They've been burnt once and don't want to be burnt again," he said.
Stanley Reed reports on energy, the environment and the Middle East for The Times from London. He has been a journalist for more than four decades.

One of the largest nuclear power plants in Europe partially shut down this weekend, overwhelmed by a gooey and spineless foe: jellyfish.
The "massive and unpredictable presence of jellyfish" forced three of the six reactors at the Gravelines Nuclear Power Station in Northern France to go offline just before midnight Sunday, according to EDF, the company that operates the plant. A fourth reactor shut down early Monday, the company said.
The jellyfish convened in the filter drums of pumping stations in the non-nuclear part of the facility, EDF said in the statement, adding that "they had no impact on the safety of the facilities, the safety of personnel, or the environment."
The shuttering of the reactors was part of the power plant's safety and protection systems, EDF said. The company said that workers were trying to restart the reactors safely. EDF did not immediately return a request for comment.
Nuclear plants often require large volumes of seawater to cool their reactors, said Erica Hendy, a professor of biogeochemical cycles at the University of Bristol in England. The plants' intake pipes have screens that prevent debris and marine life from being sucked into those cooling systems, she said, but large swarms of jellyfish can block the screens themselves.
Additionally, dead jellyfish can "liquefy into a 'gel'" and pass through the screens, causing problems deeper in the plant system.
Cooling water from the plant, located on the edge of the North Sea, is used by a commercial farm to help raise fish because it is warmer than the seawater, according to the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Warmer water temperatures have also been associated with larger jellyfish populations.
Jellyfish are 95 percent water, but in large swarms they can cause big problems for nuclear power plants by clogging their cooling intake systems.
"The issue of jellyfish and power generation disruption remains a global challenge, as blooms of jellyfish are becoming more frequent and widespread due to factors such as overfishing, climate change and increased coastal development," according to the Oceanic Invertebrate Research Institute.
Nuclear plants around the globe have been affected by jellyfish swarms. In 2011 alone, jellyfish caused shutdowns at plants in Israel, Japan, and Scotland. In 2013, an invasion of jellyfish paralyzed a reactor in Sweden.

A Chinese military magazine, Naval and Merchant Ships, recently zeroed in on one of Taiwan's biggest vulnerabilities. The island democracy, which China claims is part of its territory and threatens to overtake, imports more than 96 percent of its energy.
Most of it - oil, coal and liquefied natural gas - arrives by ship, and most of the oil is from the Middle East. China could debilitate Taiwan by blocking these ships and thereby "win without fighting," the magazine said.
China's most recent military drills around Taiwan simulated doing exactly that. These actions not only could devastate Taiwan but could bring the global economy to a standstill, because the world relies on Taiwan's factories for the majority of advanced computer chips.
All countries need a mix of energy sources to ensure a stable fuel supply, said Thomas Isaacs, an expert on nuclear energy and waste. "But for Taiwan it is an order of magnitude more important," he said.
Taiwan's manufacturing sector, including its power-hungry chip factories, already eats up more than a third of the island's energy supply. And as chipmakers like Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, or TSMC, build more factories in Taiwan to keep up with skyrocketing demand for artificial intelligence chips, it has become even more important for the island to be able to make its own electricity.
TSMC, which makes chips for Apple and Nvidia, operates 17 factories, called fabs, in Taiwan. It plans to build six more this year. Nvidia, Google and Amazon have also announced investments in Taiwan. The government said it expected that within the next five years, Taiwan would need 13 percent more electricity to support the booming demand from the A.I. industry.
"Data centers filled with A.I. servers, increasingly precise semiconductors, state-of-the-art fabs - all of these advanced industrial breakthroughs require unprecedented amounts of energy," said Raymond Greene, the director of the American Institute in Taiwan, the unofficial U.S. diplomatic mission in the country, at a gathering of business executives in March.
As Taiwan's demand for energy has increased, its efforts to add more clean energy sources have become more important - and harder to achieve. In 2016, the government vowed that by this year, 20 percent of Taiwan's energy would come from renewable sources. But last year, officials said they would fail to meet that goal and lowered the target to about 15 percent.
Disagreement between legislators and difficulties acquiring land have slowed the energy transition, said Tsaiying Lu, who works at the Research Institute for Democracy, Society and Emerging Technology, a government-funded think tank in Taipei.
The state electricity company, Taipower, has built giant wind turbines along the island's western coast and installed solar panels that generate 14 megawatts of power.
In the mountains on the eastern coast, one of Taiwan's most seismically active areas, the state oil company, CPC, has repurposed oil rigs to dig geothermal wells up to two miles underground.
Geothermal energy, producing power from the heat inside the Earth, is a developing field. Researchers in Taiwan said the techniques they developed could eventually be deployed in other locations around the world. The industry generates less than 1 percent of Taiwan's energy supply, but the government has said that within three decades, it will make up 15 percent of it.
One hurdle facing the nascent geothermal industry is staffing. Bill Chen, a geothermal energy manager at CPC, said the kinds of engineers the company needed to do the specialized technical work were rarely interested in spending their days outdoors in the mud and rain at a drilling site. Most quit before completing their first year on the job, he said.
At the Renze plant in Yilan, one of Taiwan's four operational geothermal facilities, generators hum and the air is thick with sulfur. Hsu Wen-ko, a power generation manager at Taipower, said his team had been "exhausting all methods" to make geothermal a reliable energy source for Taiwan.
As steam fogged his glasses, Mr. Hsu said scientists could not be sure how much power a given site would yield until they started drilling."
What's beneath the ground is largely unknown," he said.
Taiwan's energy capabilities took another hit last month when the island closed its last remaining nuclear power plant, the Maanshan No. 2 Nuclear Reactor. It had been one of the few places where Taiwan made its own electricity.
Nuclear energy once met more than 50 percent of Taiwan's energy demand, but years of opposition after the disaster in Fukushima, Japan, in 2011, and public outcry over waste disposal sites, set in motion the slow shutdown of the industry.
Now, momentum is building for a nuclear restart in Taiwan, and a slow turnabout is underway in public and political willingness to accept nuclear energy.
Yang Chia-fa is a founder of a clean energy activist group, Climate Vanguards, and works for Taipower. Last summer, he traveled with a dozen activists to southern Taiwan to protest the planned shutdown of Maanshan. "Nuclear power is the real clean energy," Mr. Yang said.
Days before Maanshan was shut down, lawmakers agreed to amend a law that could revive the reactor. The amendment, which needs to be signed by the president to take effect, would extend the allowable life span of nuclear facilities in Taiwan to 60 from 40 years. While several of Taiwan's shuttered nuclear power plants have been dormant too long to be revived, the legislation could pave the way for a restart at Maanshan.
Taiwan's president, Lai Ching-te, assured members of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party in May that even without nuclear power, Taiwan was not at risk of an electricity shortage.
But Taiwan has struggled with blackouts during heat waves and droughts in recent years, leaving millions without power. And there are concerns that the government's existing investments in wind, solar and geothermal energy will not be able to keep up with the growing demand of Taiwan's factories.
"If we continue to develop energy at the current speed, it will probably be far from enough to meet the demand for electricity," said Ko Ju-Chun, a legislator in the opposition Nationalist Party who supports the revival of nuclear power. "We don't have the conditions to be optimistic."

The acting administrator of NASA has issued a directive to fast-track efforts to put a nuclear reactor on the moon.
"To properly advance this critical technology to be able to support a future lunar economy, high power energy generation on Mars, and to strengthen our national security in space, it is imperative the agency move quickly," Sean Duffy, the secretary of transportation whom President Trump appointed last month as temporary leader of the space agency, wrote in the directive, which was sent out on Thursday.
Politico was first to report on the directive.
In it, Mr. Duffy cites plans by China and Russia to put a reactor on the moon by the mid-2030s as part of a partnership to build a base there. If they were first, China and Russia "could potentially declare a keep-out zone" that would inhibit what the United States could do there, Mr. Duffy said.
The directive calls for the appointment of a NASA official to oversee the effort within 30 days and for a request seeking proposals from commercial companies to be issued within 60 days. The reactor will be required to generate at least 100 kilowatts of electrical power - enough for about 80 households in the United States - and to be ready to launch in late 2029.
One lunar day lasts four weeks on Earth - two weeks of continual sunshine followed by two weeks of cold darkness. That harsh cycle makes it difficult for a spacecraft or a moon base to survive with just solar panels and batteries. Current exploration efforts, both by NASA and by the Chinese-Russian partnership, are focusing on the south polar region, where the sun is never high over the horizon and the bottoms of some craters lie in permanent shadows.
Over the years, NASA has financed nuclear reactor research, including the awarding of three $5 million contracts in 2022 to companies developing initial designs. Those designs were smaller, producing 40 kilowatts and weighing under six metric tons.
The acceleration of nuclear development is part of the administration's efforts to focus NASA on human spaceflight, while seeking deep cuts to robotic space probes, climate science research and aviation technology development.
It is, however, not clear what the nuclear reactor will power
The first moon landing under NASA's return-to-the-moon program, known as Artemis, is scheduled for 2027, but many experts find that timeline unlikely. Many of the needed components, including the Starship lunar lander under development by SpaceX, are still unproven.
The Trump administration wants to pivot to using commercial rockets and spacecraft instead of the Space Launch System rocket and the Orion crew capsule that NASA has been working on for more than a decade.
A reactor would be useful for long-term stays on the moon, especially during the two-week-long nights, but NASA's plans do not specify when a base might be built.
Mr. Duffy issued a second directive, also on Thursday, aimed at speeding up the development of commercial space stations to replace the International Space Station, which is scheduled to be retired in 2030. The directive changes how the agency will award contracts, allowing more flexibility.
NASA will start seeking proposals within 60 days and will award at least two contracts.

A Trump-sponsored business is once again betting on an industry that the president has championed, further entwining his personal fortunes in sectors that his administration is both supporting and overseeing.
This one is in the nuclear power sector. TAE Technologies, which is developing fusion energy, said on Thursday that it planned to merge with Trump Media & Technology Group. President Trump is the largest shareholder of the money-losing social media and crypto investing firm that bears his name, and he will remain a major investor in the combined company.
The deal, should it be completed, would put Mr. Trump in competition with other energy companies over which his administration holds financial and regulatory sway. Already, the president has sought to speed up safety reviews of new nuclear power plants and lower thresholds for acceptable radiation exposure.
"Having the president and his family have a large stake in a particular energy source is very problematic," said Peter A. Bradford, who previously served on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the independent agency that oversees the industry.
The Trump administration has sought to accelerate nuclear power technology - including fusion, which remains unproven - in its drive to meet America's quickly growing demand for energy, particularly as tech companies build power-hungry data centers in the race for artificial intelligence. That support has come in the form of federal loans and grants, as well as executive orders directing the N.R.C. to review and approve applications more quickly.
Mr. Trump has taken similar steps to reduce regulatory oversight of the crypto industry, especially by the Securities and Exchange Commission. He also signed an executive order last week that would make it difficult for states to regulate A.I., something tech companies had wanted.
The White House press secretary, Karoline Leavitt, said in a statement that "neither the president nor his family have ever engaged, or will ever engage, in conflicts of interest." A spokeswoman for Trump Media said the company was "scrupulously following all applicable rules and regulations, and any hypothetical speculation about ethics violations is wholly unsupported by the facts."
Mr. Trump's stake in Trump Media, recently valued at $1.6 billion, is held in a trust managed by Donald Trump Jr., his eldest son. Trump Media is the parent company of Truth Social, the struggling social-media platform. The merger would set Trump Media in a new strategic direction, while giving TAE a stock market listing as it continues to develop its nuclear fusion technology.
Michl Binderbauer, chief executive of TAE, said in an interview that he had struck the deal with Trump Media for "the capital available and the will to boldly deploy that on this project."
He added that he welcomed regulatory scrutiny of his company's technology. "We will stand up to that," Mr. Binderbauer said.
Every nuclear reactor in operation today is powered by fission, which releases energy by splitting large atoms, typically uranium. That process can create enormous amounts of electricity without any air pollution or planet-warming emissions, but it can also produce dangerously high levels of radiation, which is why conventional nuclear reactors have to follow strict safety regulations.
Fusion, by contrast, produces energy by combining smaller atoms together. There is no risk of runaway chain reactions or meltdowns, and the radioactive waste it leaves behind is less dangerous. Because of that, the N.R.C. unanimously voted in 2023 to regulate fusion reactors more lightly than fission reactors, treating them similarly to particle accelerators used for scientific research. The White House is currently reviewing the proposed rules governing approvals for fusion reactors.
More than two dozen start-ups across the United States have collectively raised billions of dollars in an effort to build working fusion reactors, which offer the promise of limitless clean power, though many scientists think the technology still faces steep hurdles.
The biggest of those challenges are likely to be technical rather than regulatory, and it was not yet clear if TAE or any other company had solved them, said Adam Stein, director of nuclear innovation at the Breakthrough Institute, a pro-nuclear research organization.
But, he added, federal regulators most likely would get involved in efforts to build out fuel supplies for the reactors, should they ever start scaling up. "There's no fuel supply chain for fusion right now," Mr. Stein said. "That will be another growing challenge."
Although the United States has the world's largest fleet of nuclear power plants, only three new reactors have come online since 1996. Many utilities have been deterred by the high cost of building nuclear fission plants.
Nuclear power companies and politicians from both parties, including the Trump administration, have frequently faulted the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which reviews new designs, for impeding nuclear power. Critics say many of the regulations the agency uses are excessive and no longer appropriate for a wave of advanced fission reactors that are being designed to be less susceptible to meltdowns.
In May, Mr. Trump signed four executive orders aimed at accelerating the construction of nuclear power plants. One directed the N.R.C. to streamline its safety rules and to take no more than 18 months to approve applications for new reactors. It also urged the agency to consider lowering its safety limits for radiation exposure, saying current rules go beyond what is needed to protect human health.
"We're going to get it very fast, and we're going to get it very safe," Mr. Trump said at the time.
Separately, the Energy and Defense Departments have started programs to build novel reactor designs on federal lands and military bases. The N.R.C. would not need to approve these reactors, but the administration has signaled that it would like to prove out the technology so that safety regulators could more quickly license them for commercial use later.
At the same time, the Trump administration has sought greater authority over the N.R.C., which has traditionally operated at a distance from the White House.
In June, Mr. Trump abruptly fired Christopher Hanson, who had served as chair of the commission under President Joseph R. Biden Jr. It was the first time in the N.R.C.'s history that a commissioner had been removed - typically, the five commissioners of the agency are appointed for fixed terms. Mr. Trump appointed David A. Wright as chairman.
While Mr. Wright has insisted that the N.R.C. would remain independent and would not "rubber stamp" any reactors, two Democratic commissioners have expressed concern that they could be fired for making decisions at odds with the administration.
"I think on any given day, I could be fired by the administration for reasons unknown," one of them, Bradley R. Crowell, said at a Senate hearing in September.
Allison M. Macfarlane, who previously led the N.R.C., said eroding the agency's independence put the country at risk. "The politicians have just put their thumb on the regulator," she said.

The giant policy bill muscled through Congress by Republicans is poised to remake American energy by slashing tax breaks for wind and solar power and electric cars while maintaining some federal support for sources like nuclear reactors and geothermal plants.
The legislation, which carries President Trump's domestic policy agenda, provides a boost to fossil fuels and dismantles many of the biggest actions the federal government has ever taken to fight climate change, even as scientists warn that rising temperatures are creating acute dangers from extreme heat, deadly wildfires, crop failures and floods.
Yet there is still uncertainty about how changes from the bill will play out.
Solar farms could still get built even without federal subsidies, though they could be more expensive and more likely to use components made in China than in the United States. Other industries that get favorable treatment, like technology that captures carbon dioxide, could nevertheless struggle.

The bill would quickly phase out tax credits for wind and solar power, two of the fastest growing sources of electricity in the United States. Both industries could shrink but are unlikely to vanish, experts said.
Previously, companies building wind and solar farms could qualify for a tax credit worth at least 30 percent of costs if they began construction before 2034. Under the new law, projects would likely need to start construction within the next year - roughly by July 2026 - to have the best chance of getting the full credit. After that, the subsidy becomes harder to get and swiftly expires.
Developers are now racing to stockpile panels and equipment so they can beat that deadline. But hundreds of planned projects could get canceled or become pricier. All told, the amount of wind and solar capacity expected to come online by 2035 could fall by half, some analysts predict.
Still, in places like the breezy Great Plains or sunny Southwest, building wind and solar farms will remain one of the easiest ways to squeeze more electrons onto the grid, even without subsidies. Electricity demand is surging, and there is a multiyear backlog for new natural gas turbines. So utilities and tech companies may keep buying renewable energy, albeit at higher costs.
 "We'll continue to build out renewables, but we'll build out a lot slower," said David Carroll, chief renewables officer for ENGIE North America, a major power plant developer. The changes, he added, "are ultimately going to hurt consumers, because it's going to raise prices."
Beijing is selling clean energy to the world, Washington is pushing oil and gas. Both are driven by national security.
The renewable industry did prevail on Senate Republicans like John Curtis of Utah and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska to make a few last-minute changes. A contentious tax on future wind and solar projects got stripped from the bill. And solar leasing companies, which have made rooftop systems widely accessible, are no longer barred from tax credits, as they were in an earlier draft.
At the same time, the Trump administration has hindered renewable energy in other ways, such as halting federal approvals for wind farms. On Thursday, Representative Ralph Norman, Republican of South Carolina, who had withheld his support for the bill because it didn't immediately cease tax credits for wind and solar, said Mr. Trump had promised to address his concerns through executive action. That assurance led him to vote for the bill, he said.
While Republicans slashed support for wind and solar, they preserved until 2036 a major Biden-era tax credit for companies that build other emissions-free power technologies like nuclear reactors, hydroelectric dams, geothermal plants and battery storage. These sources can run at all hours, unlike wind and solar.
Mr. Trump has a longstanding animus for wind turbines and solar panels, which he calls "ugly" and inefficient. Chris Wright, the energy secretary, supports more nuclear power in addition to championing fossil fuels.
Experts say that new nuclear and geothermal plants could help tackle climate change, because they don't generate greenhouse gases that warm the planet. But they will take time to develop and face challenges in scaling up, including high costs.
The tax credit could also still be claimed by anyone adding large batteries to the grid, something that companies are increasingly doing in California and Texas to back up wind and solar plants and prevent power outages.
Yet China currently dominates supply chains for batteries and Congress added complex restrictions to the credits that bar recipients from having ties to "prohibited foreign entities" like China. The Treasury Department would need to clarify those rules, and some worry that the restrictions are so complicated that the credits could end up being unusable for many projects.
"There's a ton of uncertainty around these new rules," said Advait Arun, a senior associate for energy finance at the Center for Public Enterprise, a nonprofit organization. "It's premature to call this bill a victory" for nuclear and geothermal power, he said.
The bill is likely to put a major dent in the U.S. electric car market by repealing federal incentives that have been critical to its growth.
Tax credits worth up to $7,500 to buy new or used electric cars will end by Sept. 30, 2025 under the new bill. (Those credits were previously available until 2032.) Also expiring is a loophole that allowed companies to pass tax savings on to people who leased vehicles. Incentives for businesses to buy electric trucks will vanish.
Electric cars won't disappear from dealerships, but they will get pricier. At the same time, the Trump administration is rolling back federal fuel-efficiency rules and has sought to block a California plan intended to force automakers to sell more zero-emissions vehicles.
Those factors together could mean tens of millions fewer electric cars sold over the next decade than previously expected, according to the Rhodium Group, a research firm.
That could leave the United States falling behind China and Europe, where electric vehicles are spreading rapidly. At the same time, some auto executives believe electric vehicles will eventually displace gasoline-powered cars and say they will keep investing in the technology.
"We are in a global competition with China, and it's not just E.V.s," Jim Farley, the chief executive of Ford, said recently at the Aspen Ideas Festival. "And if we lose this we do not have a future at Ford."
Winner: Biofuels
Some technologies got a boost in the bill. A tax credit for so-called "clean fuels" like ethanol was extended for another two years, through the end of 2029. The bill also makes it easier for biofuels made from crops like corn to qualify, by easing emissions rules.
Critics of this provision have argued that while some biofuels could be useful for limiting climate change, such as certain sustainable aviation fuels, the current tax credit often subsidizes fuels that do little to cut planet-warming emissions. Yet the credit is popular with Republicans who represent farm states like Iowa and Nebraska.
Loser: U.S. factories
When Democrats in 2022 created and expanded a slew of federal tax breaks for electric vehicles, solar panels, wind turbines, batteries, they designed them to encourage companies to use components made in the United States. That spurred a manufacturing boom, including solar-panel glass recyclers in Georgia and electric-vehicle assembly lines in Kentucky.
The new law could derail many of those factories.
The old tax credit for solar power, for instance, offered developers a bonus if they used domestic panels. With that credit expiring by 2027, some companies looking to install solar may now prefer to use cheaper components from China, a manufacturing powerhouse.
"This bill will lead to a flood of Chinese imports, hurting U.S. manufacturing jobs and investments," said Mike Carr, the executive director of the Solar Energy Manufacturers for America, a trade group.
The electric vehicle tax credit was likewise available only for domestically made vehicles. At least 24 U.S. factories had been set up to produce electric cars that qualify, including a General Motors battery plant in Ohio, according to Atlas Public Policy, a research firm. Axing the credit could reduce demand for U.S.-made vehicles, batteries and key minerals like lithium.
The policy bill "took a sledgehammer to the domestic E.V. and battery supply chain that will be felt in communities around the country, particularly in the Battery Belt, the Southwest, and the industrial Midwest," said Albert Gore III, executive director of the Zero Emission Transportation Association, a trade group for electric vehicle manufacturers. The Battery Belt refers to southeastern states where manufacturing has become concentrated.
Possible winner: Hydrogen
Senate Republicans made a last-minute tweak that partially salvaged a lucrative tax credit for companies that make clean hydrogen fuels. The credit will now be available through the end of 2027 instead of being phased out this year, as House Republicans had proposed. (Previously, it was expected to last until 2033.)
When burned, hydrogen emits mainly water vapor, and it could be used instead of fossil fuels to make steel or fertilizer or to power ships. But most current hydrogen is produced from fossil fuels in a dirty process, and very little so-called "clean" hydrogen exists today.
Hydrogen companies praised senators for not abruptly ending the credit, though projects still face headwinds. The fact that wind and solar power will become more expensive could make it harder to produce renewable hydrogen. Some lawmakers also fear that the Trump administration could revoke $8 billion in Biden-era funding that created regional hubs around the country for the production, storage and transportation of clean hydrogen.
Loser: Energy efficiency
The bill terminates at the end of the year tax credits that were aimed at helping homeowners perform energy audits, upgrade their insulation, buy electric heat pumps or more efficient water heaters and install rooftop solar panels.
In 2023, more than 3.4 million homes in the United States used these credits to reduce their energy costs, said Ari Matusiak, the chief executive of Rewiring America, a nonprofit organization that promotes the electrification of homes. Now, he said, "families will face rising electricity costs with fewer tools to do anything about it."
Mr. Trump came into office promising to expand the production and use of oil, gas and coal, the burning of which is heating the planet. In ways large and small, the bill achieves that.
The legislation mandates oil and gas lease sales in Alaska, the Gulf of Mexico and the American West. It lowers the royalty rates that coal companies pay to mine on federal lands. It provides additional tax breaks to oil and gas producers for "intangible drilling and development costs." And it delays for 10 years a hefty fee on oil and gas companies that leak methane, a potent greenhouse gas, from their operations.
In a surprising last-minute change, Senate Republicans added a 2.5 percent tax break for U.S. production of metallurgical coal, a form of coal that has been used for decades in steel-making and is mainly exported to countries like India and Brazil.
The bill also increases the value of a tax credit for companies that capture carbon dioxide from smokestacks and inject the gas into oil wells to dislodge more crude, a process known as enhanced oil recovery.
But the rollback of clean energy tax credits will also aid the fossil-fuel industry. Fewer electric cars on the road mean higher gasoline consumption. And fewer wind turbines and solar panels mean that, at the margins, electric utilities will burn more gas and coal.
"This historic legislation will help usher in a new era of energy dominance by unlocking opportunities for investment, opening lease sales and expanding access to oil and natural gas development," said Mike Sommers, the chief executive of the American Petroleum Institute, which represents oil and gas companies.

In China, more wind turbines and solar panels were installed last year than in the rest of the world combined. And China's clean energy boom is going global. Chinese companies are building electric vehicle and battery factories in Brazil, Thailand, Morocco, Hungary and beyond.
At the same time, in the United States, President Trump is pressing Japan and South Korea to invest "trillions of dollars" in a project to ship natural gas to Asia. And General Motors just killed plans to make electric motors at a factory near Buffalo, N.Y., and instead will put $888 million into building V-8 gasoline engines there.
The race is on to define the future of energy. Even as the dangers of global warming hang ominously over the planet, two of the most powerful countries in the world, the United States and China, are pursuing energy strategies defined mainly by economic and national security concerns, as opposed to the climate crisis. Entire industries are at stake, along with the economic and geopolitical alliances that shape the modern world.
The Trump administration wants to keep the world hooked on fossil fuels like oil and gas, which have powered cars and factories, warmed homes and fueled empires for more than a century. The United States is the world's largest producer of oil and the largest exporter of natural gas, offering the potential for what Mr. Trump has called an era of American "energy dominance" that eliminates dependence on foreign countries, particularly rival powers like China.
Inside China's drive to dominate clean energy. First in a series.
China is racing in an altogether different direction. It's banking on a world that runs on cheap electricity from the sun and wind, and that relies on China for affordable, high-tech solar panels and turbines. China, unlike the United States, doesn't have much easily accessible oil or gas of its own relative to its huge population. So it is eager to eliminate dependence on imported fossil fuels and instead power more of its economy with renewables.
The dangers for China of relying on politically unstable regions for energy were underscored recently when Israel attacked Iran, which sells practically all its oil exports to China.
While China still burns more coal than the rest of the world and emits more climate pollution than the United States and Europe combined, its pivot to cleaner alternatives is happening at breakneck speed. Not only does China already dominate global manufacturing of solar panels, wind turbines, batteries, E.V.s and many other clean energy industries, but with each passing month it is widening its technological lead.
China's biggest automaker, its biggest battery maker and its biggest electronics company have each introduced systems that can recharge electric cars in just five minutes, all but erasing one of the most annoying hassles of E.V.s, the long charging times. China has nearly 700,000 clean energy patents, more than half of the world's total. Beijing's rise as a clean power behemoth is altering economies and shifting alliances in emerging countries as far afield as Pakistan and Brazil.
The country is also taking steps that could make it hard for other countries, particularly the United States, to catch up. In April, Beijing restricted the export of powerful "rare earth" magnets, a business China dominates, unless they're already inside fully assembled products like electric vehicles or wind turbines. While China recently started issuing some export licenses for the magnets, the moves signal that the world may face a choice: Buy China's green energy technology, or do without.
China has also begun to dominate nuclear power, a highly technical field once indisputably led by the United States. China not only has 31 reactors under construction, nearly as many as the rest of the world combined, but has announced advances in next-generation nuclear technologies and also in fusion, the long-promised source of all-but-limitless clean energy that has bedeviled science for years.
"China is huge," said Praveer Sinha, chief executive of Tata Power, an Indian conglomerate that makes solar panels in a high-tech factory near the southern tip of the country but relies almost entirely on Chinese-made silicon to make those panels. "Huge means huge. No one in the world can compete with that."
While China is dominating clean energy industries, from patented technologies to essential raw materials, the Trump administration is using the formidable clout of the world's biggest economy to keep American oil and gas flowing.
In a full reversal from the Biden administration's effort to pivot the American economy away from fossil fuels, the Trump White House is opening up public lands and federal waters for new drilling, fast-tracking permits for pipelines and pressuring other countries to buy American fuels as a way of avoiding tariffs.
Washington is essentially pursuing a strong-arm energy strategy, both at home and abroad with allies and friends. It's premised on the idea that the modern world is already designed around these fuels, and the United States has them in abundance, so exporting them benefits the American economy even if solar energy is cleaner and often cheaper.
The competition between the United States and China to sell the world their wares has serious consequences for the health of the planet.
Burning fossil fuels for more than 200 years has helped create the modern world while delivering great prosperity to developed countries such as the United States, which ranks historically as the biggest emitter of greenhouse gases. But it has also led to what scientists now say is a growing crisis. The carbon dioxide pumped into the atmosphere by the burning of oil, gas and coal acts as a heat-trapping blanket, leading to rapid global warming.
Cheap Chinese-made solar, batteries and E.V.s have made the pivot to cleaner technologies possible for many large economies including Brazil, South Africa and even India, a regional rival to Beijing. That affordability is crucial for bringing down global emissions.
The scientific consensus is that warming, if unchecked, will continue to cause increasingly severe droughts and storms, potentially alter ocean currents and global weather patterns, disrupt food production, deepen a biodiversity crisis and inundate some of the world's biggest cities as sea levels rise, among other risks.
The Trump administration has dismissed those concerns. The United States energy secretary, Chris Wright, a former natural gas executive, has described climate change as "a side effect of building the modern world."
Asked about the diverging energy pathways of China and the United States, Ben Dietderich, a Department of Energy spokesman, said, "The United States is blessed with an abundant supply of energy resources and the Trump administration is committed to fully utilizing them to meet the growing energy needs of the American people." Past efforts to encourage cleaner energy like solar or wind, he said, "harmed America's energy security."
Amanda Eversole, executive vice president of the American Petroleum Institute, which lobbies for fossil fuel companies, said her organization monitored Chinese advances and that she was downplaying their strategic threat. "We continue to keep a very close eye on what the Chinese are doing, because we believe it's in our national security interests and our economic interest to continue to dominate from an American energy perspective," she said.
The White House declined to comment on energy strategy and China's advances.
Most of the world's energy still comes from fossil fuels. Yet as countries try to address the perils of climate change, they've been steadily adopting cleaner alternatives. By 2035, solar and wind power are expected to become the two largest sources of electricity production, surpassing coal and natural gas, according to the International Energy Agency.
As the cost of renewables keeps falling, the U.S. strategy may leave China poised to capitalize on the world's growing appetite for not only cleaner but cheaper power.
"The U.S. will champion a fossil fuel economy, and China will become the leader of the low-carbon economy," said Li Shuo, who heads the China Climate Hub at the Asia Society Policy Institute. "The question for the U.S. now is, where do you go from here?"

The United States had every opportunity to lead the world in renewables. In fact, it once did.
Americans created the first practical silicon photovoltaic cells in the 1950s and the first rechargeable lithium-metal batteries in the 1970s. The world's first wind farm was built in New Hampshire nearly 50 years ago. Jimmy Carter installed solar panels on the White House in 1979.
But with oil, gas and coal in abundant supply, and the fossil-fuel industry funding efforts to downplay climate concerns, America's commitment to promoting clean energy investment has ebbed and flowed, sometimes dramatically.
President Jimmy Carter at an event on the White House roof in 1979 after the solar panels behind him were installed there.. Universal Images Group, via Getty Images
For example, in 2009, the Obama administration began offering loan guarantees to emerging energy technologies. Tesla got $456 million, a loan that proved crucial to its later success.
Then there was Solyndra.
A maker of solar cells, Solyndra received a federal guarantee for loans totaling $528 million, then went out of business, leaving taxpayers on the hook. More than a decade has passed, yet critics of American efforts to promote clean energy still cite Solyndra as evidence of the folly of renewables.
Chinese officials have been mystified by the Solyndra fixation.
"You are a little bit worried by Solyndra? Very small companies, why are you worried?" Li Junfeng, a key architect of China's wind and solar policies, said in a 2017 interview. Beijing had a bigger appetite for taking risks, which meant sometimes failing, but also sometimes reaping bigger payoffs.
China's goal of dominating clean energy technology wasn't about climate change. It was born in a moment of strategic self-awareness two decades ago, when the country's leaders looked to the future and understood that controlling energy production was vital to national security.
In 2003, Wen Jiabao became China's premier, the country's second-highest position. A rare-earths geologist, Mr. Wen saw energy policy as both a business opportunity and geopolitical necessity.
China had become dependent on imported oil. It felt vulnerable to upheavals in the Middle East and to the control of shipping lanes by the United States and India, two sometimes hostile powers.
Air pollution in China was terrible, killing people and creating a global embarrassment with images of cities smothered in gray. And the economy still relied on relatively unskilled manufacturing. Mr. Wen saw in energy a chance to solve both problems by making China an energy innovator.
"Instead of making flip-flops, they'd make clean tech," said Jennifer Turner, director of the China environment program at the Woodrow Wilson Center.
Mr. Wen's government essentially wrote a blank check.
China provided hundreds of billions of dollars in subsidies to wind, solar and electric car manufacturers while protecting its markets from foreign competitors. It established a global near-monopoly over many key raw materials, such as cobalt for batteries.
Low-cost electricity from heavily polluting coal plants allowed the country to run aluminum smelters and polysilicon factories more cheaply than anywhere else. Critics have also accused China of using forced labor in places like Xinjiang to drive down costs, though China denies this.
At the same time, China has invested in research and a skilled workforce. These moves offered Chinese clean energy companies a level of sustained support that was nonexistent in the United States.
"It's hard to get China to commit to a long-term goal," said Jian Pan, co-chairman of CATL, the world's largest maker of batteries for electric vehicles and electric grids. "But when we commit, we really want to get it done, and all aspects of society - government, policy, private sector, engineering, everybody - work hard toward the same goal under a coordinated effort."
China's efforts paid off.
Little more than a decade ago, CATL was a start-up created to buy a Japanese electronics company's nascent electric-car battery division. Today, from its headquarters, which are shaped like an enormous battery, it operates a global network of mines, chemical processors and factories. Its founder is one of the wealthiest people in the world.
Over that same short stretch of time, China came to dominate even clean energy industries the United States had once led. In 2008 the United States produced nearly half of the world's polysilicon, a crucial material for solar panels. Today, China produces more than 90 percent. China's auto industry is now widely seen as the most innovative in the world, besting the Japanese, the Germans and the Americans.
To slash manufacturing costs, China has automated its factories, installing more robots each year from 2021 through 2023 than the rest of the world combined, and seven times as many as the United States.
Eric Luo, vice-president of LONGi Green Energy Technology, a Chinese solar panel maker, said that a practice known as "cluster manufacturing" had proved beneficial. "There are places where, within a three- to four-hour drive, you can have everything," he said. The components, the manufacturer, the skilled workforce, everything. "There's nowhere else globally where you can have all that innovation clustered together."
Clustering also imparts huge benefits in the car battery business. Robin Zeng, CATL's founder, said in an interview last summer that it costs six times as much to build a battery factory in the United States as in China, and that was before the Trump administration set out to weaken the financial incentives to build such plants in the United States.
Beyond its domination of manufacturing and technology, China has also gone on an epic clean-energy building spree.
Last June, the Urumqi solar farm, the largest in the world, came online in the Xinjiang Autonomous Region in China. It is capable of generating more power than some small countries need to run their entire economies.
It's hardly an anomaly. The other 10 largest solar facilities in the world are also in China, and even bigger ones are planned. The Chinese automaker BYD is currently building not one but two electric vehicle factories that will each produce twice as many cars as the largest car factory in the world, a Volkswagen plant in Germany.
The United States was slow to see the full picture. Only toward the end of the Obama administration and during the first Trump administration did many Washington policymakers realize they had surrendered so much of the clean energy race to China.
"The U.S. was asleep," said Michael Carr, a former staff member at the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee who is now executive director of Solar Energy Manufacturers for America, a trade group. "You can invent the greatest tech in the world, but if you don't know how to manufacture it, it won't matter."
Of course, the United States could reverse course. A future administration could aggressively swing once again to clean energy research and investment.
But it will have lost precious time. Investments made years ago by China are paying off now, and Beijing is continuing to pour money into developing its domestic energy industry and exporting those goods to the world.
Among China's biggest green-energy customers is a petrostate, Saudi Arabia. On desert land renowned for its boundless oil reserves, Chinese companies are building one of the world's largest battery-storage projects alongside solar farms.
Around the world, Beijing is using its clean energy clout to build or expand political and economic relationships.
Both the United States and China not only see energy independence as essential at home, but understand that supplying other countries with energy is a vital way to project power. And yet, their approaches couldn't be more different.
Today, China's dominance of so many clean energy industries is enabling it to expand its sphere of influence by selling and financing energy technology around the world. These relationships allow China to forge multidecade financial, cultural and even military ties at a moment of shifting geopolitical alliances.
The projects read like a world atlas. Beijing is working on deals to supply nuclear reactors to countries like Turkey that once did business mainly with the United States and Europe. In Pakistan, China is already building what will be the country's largest nuclear plant.
Chinese firms are building wind turbines in Brazil and electric vehicles in Indonesia. In northern Kenya, Chinese developers have erected Africa's biggest wind farm. And across the continent, in countries rich with minerals needed for clean energy technologies, such as Zambia, Chinese financing for all sorts of projects has left some governments deeply in debt to Chinese banks.
Since 2023, Chinese companies have announced $168 billion in foreign investments in clean energy manufacturing, generation and transmission, according to Climate Energy Finance, a research group.
China's announced foreign investments in clean tech since 2023

"They are dominating these markets," said Dr. Turner of the Woodrow Wilson Center. "And market dominance can be a form of soft power."
The Trump administration is taking a different road. By dismantling a vast network of foreign aid programs, it has abandoned America's longstanding strategy for projecting soft power.
In its place it is taking a more transactional approach with other countries. In Saudi Arabia, for example, while the Chinese are building a battery project there, the United States recently agreed to a major arms sale, and an American company agreed to set up rare-earth mining, processing and magnet manufacturing. And it is moving aggressively to sell other countries more fossil fuels.
Mr. Trump, who last year accepted more than $75 million in campaign donations from oil and gas executives, promised to "drill, baby, drill" and deliver an era of "energy dominance." In his first few months he has tried to clear the way for more exports and to nudge foreign governments to buy more American gas.
Ukraine, for example, is desperate to maintain military supplies from the United States and has signaled it would buy more American gas. It's another example of the administration's aggressive approach, even with friends.
America gets "geopolitical leverage from oil and gas," said Varun Sivaram, a fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations who helped write clean energy policy for the Biden administration. "The energy transition is actually very bad for the United States," he said, "because we cede geopolitical and economic ground to a rival in China."
What Will the World Buy?
The future is being defined one deal at a time. The United States is pressing South Korea and Japan to buy more Alaskan natural gas and invest in a huge, longshot pipeline project there. China has been demanding that the European Union allow electric cars from China into its large market, although that could cause widespread job losses in Europe's own car industry.
There is unlikely to be an immediate winner in this global race. The world is only becoming more energy-hungry, stoking an appetite for both solar panels and oil, nuclear and natural gas.
That may work well both for Beijing and for Washington in the short term. The United States still has many customers for its enormous stores of oil, gas and coal. Roughly 80 percent of global energy needs are still met by fossil fuels.
But that proportion is widely expected to decline. The International Energy Agency forecasts that by midcentury, oil, gas and coal will fall below 60 percent of global energy needs.
And China is positioned to pick up the extra business.
"When the federal government of the United States decides to go out of the race, it doesn't stop the race," said Rafael Dubeux, a senior official in Brazil's Finance Ministry. "Other countries keep moving."

The Interior Department said it would fast-track the permitting process for a uranium mine in Utah as part of President Trump's plan to shorten environmental reviews and speed the construction of certain types of energy projects.
An environmental assessment of the Velvet-Wood mine project will be completed in 14 days, the agency announced. Such a review would typically take about one year.
Critics have called the plan to drastically shrink the review time dangerous, and projects that are approved under such a compressed process are likely to face legal challenges.
In a statement, Doug Burgum, the interior secretary, said the expedited process had been established to fix what he called an "alarming energy emergency because of the prior administration's Climate Extremist policies." He said that the speedy review "represents exactly the kind of decisive action we need to secure our energy future."
The Velvet-Wood project, in San Juan County, Utah, aims to produce uranium, which is used as a fuel in nuclear power plants, as well as vanadium, used in the production of steel alloys.
It is being built on the site of an older mine that closed in the 1980s. The company leading the project, Anfield Energy, also plans to restart a uranium mill to extract uranium from ore.
The Interior Department said the project would result in three acres of land "disturbance." The agency declined to make public the permit application or other documents detailing what it meant by "disturbance."
Sarah Fields, founder of Uranium Watch, an environmental group based in Utah, said her organization had concerns about effects on water resources, as well as about radioactive waste from mining operations.
Ms. Fields said the expedited approval process also meant "there's no opportunity for public comment, and the public often brings up issues to the agency that they're not aware of."
He said he expected to be able to recover 4 million tons of uranium and nearly 5 million tons of vanadium over the life of the project. "The fact that we're being recognized as an advanced asset to be put into operation by the government, I think, is a big thing for us," Mr. Dias said. "It also reflects the nature of the importance of uranium for domestic production."
The decision to fast-track a uranium project comes as the White House is considering several executive orders aimed at speeding the construction of nuclear power plants to help meet rising electricity demand, according to drafts reviewed by The New York Times.
The Interior Department has said that the United States is "dangerously reliant" on imports of uranium and vanadium to meet its needs. It has argued that, in 2023, U.S. nuclear generators relied 99 percent on imported uranium concentrate, including from Russia.
On the first day of his second term as president, Mr. Trump issued an executive order declaring a "national energy emergency," part of a push to expand oil and gas production. It said that energy production was not meeting the nation's needs.

Mr. Burgum then initiated a process by which environmental reviews that typically take a year to complete would be finished in 14 days. More complicated environmental impact statements, which usually take two years, would be completed in 28 days, the department said.
U.S. energy production has been near record highs.
The Interior Department is condensing the review process by claiming emergency authority under the National Environmental Policy Act, the Endangered Species Act and the National Historic Preservation Act.
Fifteen states have sued the Trump administration over the energy emergency declaration. They have argued that no emergency exists and that the order instructs regulators to illegally bypass reviews of fossil fuel projects, potentially damaging the environment.

She was in middle school in March 2011, when three reactors melted down at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant about 40 miles from her home in northern Japan. Living outside the evacuation zone, she continued to go about her life, shopping and cycling to school.
Four years later, a screening found a malignant tumor in her thyroid, a gland in the neck that is known to be vulnerable to radioactive particles released during a nuclear accident. But when she got the diagnosis, a doctor told her immediately that the growth was unrelated to the disaster.
She wondered how the doctor could judge that without making further checks. (The young woman, now in her 20s, asked that her name not be used because she has faced intense social pressure not to speak out.)
Her question is one that has not been conclusively resolved 14 years after a huge earthquake and tsunami knocked out cooling systems at the plant, leading to explosions at its reactor building that showered this region of northern Japan with radioactive particles.
A few weeks ago, the Fukushima Prefecture screening committee restated its conclusion that the triple meltdown has not caused long-term health effects. Many medical experts, including those at international agencies, have made similar findings. But there is skepticism from many residents and a minority of medical experts, who say the authorities haven't done enough to prove their case.
The young woman from Fukushima has joined six other people with cancer in a lawsuit to seek compensation from the plant's operator, Tokyo Electric Power Co. The company says there's no scientifically proven link between the cancers and radioactive particles released by the disaster. The next hearing will be held on Sept. 17, though a ruling is probably years away.
Much of the dispute has focused on the thyroid screening program, which has been the only large-scale, systematic effort to detect a major health effect from the disaster. The study found cancer rates that were many times higher than had been expected, but the meaning of that result has been fiercely contested. Medical experts on both sides agree that the question of whether or not the cancers are linked to the nuclear accident could be resolved by conducting a similarly large-scale screening elsewhere to serve as a comparison, but authorities have so far refused to do that.
"Without a base-line study, there is no way to conclude for sure whether or not these cancers are related to radiation," said Kazuo Shimizu, a thyroid surgeon who served on a committee supervising the screening but resigned in 2017.
Lessons from Chernobyl
Started seven months after the meltdown, the Fukushima program is still underway. It has conducted several rounds of checks to monitor the thyroids of people who were children at the time of the accident. The focus was a lesson of the 1986 nuclear accident at the Soviet power plant in Chernobyl, which led to a proliferation of thyroid cancers in present-day Ukraine and Belarus.
When the results of the first round of screening were announced starting in 2015, they showed an unexpectedly large number of the cancers, which were thought to be rare in children. The number has continued to climb as five more rounds of screenings have been conducted. According to the most recent figures released last month, the screenings have found 357 cases of thyroid cancer in some 300,000 people, though one was later ruled to be benign.
With an additional 47 cases that have been diagnosed separately, a total of 403 people have been found to have developed thyroid cancers. This is some 25 times more than the doctors expected based on other studies elsewhere.
While the medical experts running the program agree these numbers were surprisingly high, they say the large number doesn't reflect an outbreak of cancers, but rather the discovery with modern ultrasound equipment of cancers that would have been there anyway.
"What we discovered is that thyroid cancers are more common than we thought," said Gen Suzuki, a former professor of radiation pathology who currently heads the committee of experts evaluating the screening results.
Dr. Suzuki said most of the cancers detected were a type that needed no treatment because they wouldn't endanger health. As a result, they had simply gone undetected before.
Distrust of government
That conclusion of "over screening" has been endorsed by Japan's national government and global health groups. These include the U.N. Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, which in 2020 said that "the apparent detected excess of thyroid cancers is probably unrelated to radiation exposure."
However, there is skepticism in Japan, where there has been deep-seated public mistrust in the official handling of the Fukushima disaster that goes back to the first days, when authorities hid the size of radiation releases. Prefectural officials have been criticized for stating at the outset that their screening program's goal was "to put the public mind at ease" about radiation health risks, suggesting its conclusions were foregone.
Critics in the medical community say a closer scrutiny of the screening's results show a possible link between the cancers and levels of radiation, as people who were children in towns around the Fukushima Daiichi plant have developed cancer at rates that are three times higher than those who lived furthest away.
Dr. Suzuki says this is just a random variation in the statistics. But the dispute points to a problem: It is impossible to determine the exact cause of an individual case of cancer. The best most researchers can do is say that radiation increases the chances of getting a tumor.
Medical experts say that by looking at thyroid cancer rates in another part of Japan, or among Fukushima residents who were not children at the time of the accident, it would be possible to determine whether the number detected by the current screening was high or not.
Medical authorities in three other prefectures made one effort to conduct such a survey, but it was halted after the testing of about 4,400 people found one with cancer. The Ministry of the Environment said that was enough to show a roughly similar rate as the Fukushima cancers, but medical experts called the number of people tested too small to serve as a statistically valid comparison.
"The Fukushima screening was almost 100 times larger," said Dr. Shimizu, the thyroid surgeon.
Before he resigned from the committee, Dr. Shimizu faulted its conclusion that there was no link between the cancers and the nuclear disaster as premature. In an interview, he said the lack of a comparative study was a main reason for his view.
Social Pressure
Dr. Suzuki, whose term as head of the committee ended in July, agreed that a comparative study would give a definitive answer. However, he said many doctors nonetheless oppose a new large-scale screening because it would detect tumors and growths that have no health effects, leading to unnecessary surgeries to remove them.
Some health experts say a comparative study has been blocked for political reasons. Toshihide Tsuda, a leading critic of the Fukushima screening committee's conclusions, says the nuclear industry has pressured the government into denying funding for such a survey.
"They don't want to know the real answer," said Mr. Tsuda, a professor of environmental epidemiology at Okayama University.
Others point to the Chernobyl incident. U.N. nuclear and health agencies said for years that there was no link between the accident in the former Soviet Union and the thyroid cancers later found in children living around it. It was only a decade later, after comparative studies showed the cancers appearing in post-Soviet republics to be unusual, that the agencies altered their stance.
Those diagnosed with cancer in the Fukushima study say local residents oppose any additional surveys because they would draw attention to the issue of radiation, which can hurt tourism and farming.
The young woman in Fukushima underwent surgery to remove the cancerous thyroid gland, but she developed health problems that included chronic colds and swelling in her legs. A bout of pneumonia drove her to quit her job at a Tokyo ad agency.
But her biggest source of suffering has been her inability to publicly tell her story for fear that she and her family will be attacked on social media. The children of Fukushima still feel blocked from saying that they suffer from cancer, she said.

In the weeks since President Trump has taken office, he has pushed to unleash oil and gas production and has signed executive orders halting the country's transition to renewable energy.
But in Washington State, a government-led effort has just started to build what is expected to be the country's largest solar generating station. The project is finally inching forward, after decades of cleaning up radioactive and chemical waste in fits and starts, at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation
Hecate will have access to 10,300 acres that the government has determined sufficiently safe to redevelop. The company has already started site evaluation on 8,000 acres, an area nearly 10 times the size of Central Park in New York and enough space for 3.45 million photovoltaic panels. (Hanford's site is about 400,000 acres.)
If all goes according to plan, the Hecate project, which is expected to be completed in 2030, will be by far the largest site the government has cleaned up and converted from land that had been used for nuclear research, weapons and waste storage. It is expected to generate up to 2,000 megawatts of electricity - enough roughly to supply all the homes in Seattle, San Francisco, and Denver - and store 2,000 more in a large battery installation at a total cost of $4 billion. The photovoltaic panels and batteries will provide twice as much energy as a conventional nuclear power plant. The nation's current biggest solar plant, the Copper Mountain Solar Facility in Nevada, can generate up to 802 megawatts of energy.
The big unknown still hanging over the plan is whether the Trump administration will thwart efforts that the Biden administration put in place to develop more clean electricity generation.
Jennifer M. Granholm, until recently the energy secretary, said she was "hopeful that they will see the benefit of being able to reuse these lands for something that is really beneficial to the nation."
"These sites were developed to protect our national security," she said in an interview. "Letting the sites just go fallow is not consistent with protecting, necessarily, our national or energy security."
Dan Reicher, who served as assistant secretary of energy efficiency and renewable energy in the Clinton administration, also defended the plan. The Energy Department's agreements with Hecate are not the government's "spending taxpayer dollars to build energy generation," he said, but rather its "having made real progress on cleaning up the site, seeking a private developer and now moving ahead."
While a clean energy project may clash with Mr. Trump's policies, there's a reason the administration may allow Hecate's solar development to move forward: the revenue the government will get for the land lease. Hecate and the Energy Department declined to discuss the land's market value, but private solar developers in the region said such easements typically paid landowners $300 an acre annually.
Two officials at the Energy Department, who asked not to be named for fear of retaliation, said that neither the president nor the leaders of the administration's effort to reshape federal agencies had yet to intervene in the solar project, but that the future of the initiative was uncertain. One of the officials said the new energy secretary, Chris Wright, a former oil executive, had not yet reviewed the project as of late February.
Alex Pugh, Hecate's director of development, said the company was moving ahead despite shifting political winds. "The fundamentals of the project are strong regardless of policy direction," he said. "The region needs the project. There is a huge demand for electricity here."
Demand for power in the Pacific Northwest is increasing as more data centers are being built to power artificial intelligence. Businesses in the cities closest to Hanford - Kennewick, Pasco and Richland - and organizations pushing for job creation in the region formed the Tri-City Development Council, which has been encouraging clean energy and other environmentally safe industrial development on the federal reservation.
Hecate identified the large expanse of open ground alongside high-voltage transmission lines at Hanford as a potential site for its plant several years ago, Mr. Pugh said - long before the Energy Department solicited proposals. The potential benefits, he said, were plainly apparent.
 "It's a big plus for the region," he said. "Future investors, take note: They'll have the land. They'll have water. They'll have tax incentives for development. They'll have 2,000 megawatts coming online, potentially by the end of the decade. Everything that a developer would want."
What they also have, however, is risk. The site where Hecate plans to build its photovoltaic panels is near an area where groundwater and soil were decontaminated and alongside an experimental 400-megawatt nuclear reactor complex that was decommissioned in 2001. It's also about 20 miles south of B Reactor, the world's first full-scale nuclear reactor, which produced the plutonium for the atomic bomb used on Nagasaki, Japan.
Hecate, which has operated and developed solar stations in 12 states and is 40 percent owned by Repsol, a Spanish oil and gas company, is proceeding with caution at Hanford. "The potential risk at the site is if we find contaminated soil, contaminated water - something nobody knew about," Mr. Pugh said.

When the site was decommissioned, 54 million gallons of highly radioactive sludge was left behind in underground tanks filled with boiling liquid. The site also encompassed radioactive research and production buildings and huge stretches of poisoned land that was leaching toxic waste toward the Columbia River six miles away.
The Energy Department started an initiative in 1990 to demolish the old laboratories and manufacturing buildings and clear the nuclear reservation of hazards, but the plan became tangled with complications of developing technology to handle especially poisonous wastes and federal budget cuts in 2013 and 2019. Design defects, for instance, halted construction in 2012 of a five-story, 137,000-square-foot chemical treatment plant to reduce the risk of radioactive sludge after $4 billion had already been spent.
At one point, the government considered leaving the leftover waste buried forever in the underground tanks. Just since 2017, the government has spent $20 billion for Hanford's cleanup, which is not expected to end until late this century.
Initially, business leaders were concerned about the scale of Hecate's plan. But the Tri-City Development Council, which leases 1,641 acres from the federal government at the Hanford site, has come around, largely because Hecate's energy can help recruit big projects that need the power to the area. One that has recently arrived is Atlas Agro, which is spending $1 billion on an agricultural fertilizer plant that has lower greenhouse gas emissions and reduces the pollution risk to water.
"We would not have been supportive if we just flooded this whole area with solar," said Sean V. O'Brien, director of the Energy Forward Alliance, a unit of the development council. "We don't think that's the best economic development and job creator. We're all about the mix here."

The Energy Department is breaking up or rebranding several offices that played key roles in the Biden administration's push to develop clean energy technologies that could help address climate change.
A revised organizational chart posted by the agency on Tuesday no longer shows the Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations, the Office of Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains, or the Grid Deployment Office. Those offices had overseen billions of dollars in funding for batteries, hydrogen fuels and electrical grids, among other projects.
Also gone is the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, which has played a major role in promoting technologies like solar power. That office has been rebranded as the Office of Critical Minerals and Energy Innovation.
It is not yet clear how much of the work in these offices may be preserved or transferred elsewhere. But the overhaul reflects the priorities of the Trump administration, which has sought to dismantle Biden-era efforts to tackle global warming and encourage renewable energy and has instead focused on expanding fossil fuel production and prioritizing technologies like nuclear power.
"The Energy Department is aligning its operations to restore common sense to energy policy, lower costs for American families and businesses, and ensure the responsible stewardship of taxpayer dollars," Chris Wright, the energy secretary, said in a statement announcing the reorganization.
The Trump administration has already frozen or canceled large amounts of Biden-era clean energy funding. In May, the Energy Department announced it was terminating $3.7 billion in awards to companies trying to demonstrate technologies that could reduce greenhouse gas emissions. That included natural gas and cement companies trying to capture and bury the carbon dioxide put out by their smokestacks.
In October, Mr. Wright announced he was canceling an additional $7.5 billion for hundreds of energy projects, mostly in states run by Democrats. That included funding for large hubs to produce clean-burning hydrogen fuels as well as efforts to upgrade electrical grids and reduce methane leaks from oil and gas operations.
An internal document has also been circulating among lawmakers suggesting that the agency is considering terminating $12 billion more, including funding for two large projects in Louisiana and Texas that aimed to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
Mr. Wright has said that he does not consider climate change one of the nation's most pressing problems, as the Biden administration did. Instead, he has said he wants to prioritize energy sources that can run around the clock and help power data centers for artificial intelligence. That includes technologies like coal, natural gas, nuclear power and geothermal energy, as well as nascent fusion technology.
For the first time in decades, the agency will no longer have an Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, which was established in its current form in the 1990s and had overseen efforts to increase the energy efficiency of appliances and drive down the cost of solar panels.
The office will instead be renamed the Office of Critical Minerals and Energy Innovation, which is expected to absorb some of the functions of the now-disbanded clean energy offices, according to two people familiar with the plans who requested anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
The reorganization also eliminates the Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations, which was established by Congress as part of the bipartisan infrastructure law in 2021 and focused on scaling up emerging technologies, such as advanced nuclear reactors or hydrogen fuels. That office had already lost the vast majority of its staff under the Trump administration.
Other Biden-era offices that were disbanded include: the Grid Deployment Office, which worked on upgrading the nation's network of power lines; the Office of Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains, which had been working to establish a domestic battery industry; and the Office of State and Community Energy Programs, which helped support state efforts to improve energy efficiency.
The Trump administration is creating several new offices instead, including the Hydrocarbons and Geothermal Energy Office as well as the Office of Fusion.
The agency's high-profile Loan Programs Office, which provides billions of dollars in loans for promising technologies, will be renamed the Office of Energy Dominance Financing. Mr. Wright has said he mainly wants that office to bankroll new nuclear plants.
It is unclear whether the reorganization will lead to additional layoffs. Over the past year, the Energy Department has lost roughly 20 percent of its work force - or 3,500 employees - amid a wave of firings, layoffs and incentives for retirement.
As part of a deal to end the government shutdown this month, congressional Democrats secured a provision that barred further work force reductions at federal agencies until Jan. 30.
Kathleen Hogan, a former senior agency official who had served in both Democratic and Republican administrations, warned that reorganizations can be disruptive.
"Given the recent talent drain and other challenges, let's hope for the sake of U.S. energy security, competitiveness and business certainty that this is a positive," Ms. Hogan said.

Every year when winter finally loosens its grip on northern Japan, Tomoko Kobayashi begins what has become an annual rite for her and a small band of collaborators. They head out with measuring devices to keep tabs on an invisible threat that still pollutes the mountains and forests around their homes: radioactivity.
In her car, Ms. Kobayashi follows a route that she now knows by heart, making regular stops to probe the air with a survey meter, a box with a silver wand that looks and acts like a Geiger counter. She uses it to detect gamma rays, a telltale sign of the radioactive particles that escaped when three reactors melted down at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant in March 2011 after an undersea earthquake sent a towering tsunami crashing into the coastline.
She and a group of fellow residents of Odaka, a small community 10 miles north of the plant, spend days collecting readings at hundreds of points, which they use to create color-coded maps of radioactivity levels emanating from reactor particles still scattered across the countryside. Ms. Kobayashi posts them on the wall of her small inn for guests to see, making up for a lack of government maps detailed enough to reveal potentially hazardous spots.
 "The government wants to proclaim that the accident is over, but it isn't," said Ms. Kobayashi, 72, who reopened her inn, Futabaya, seven years ago, after the evacuation order in Odaka was lifted. The inn has been in her family for four generations and she grew up here, never imagining she would one day have to master an arcane knowledge of microsieverts and atomic half-lives.
"I choose to live here, but is it safe? Can I pick these nuts or eat those fruit? The only way to know for sure is do the measuring ourselves," she said.
Ms. Kobayashi is one of Fukushima's citizen scientists, residents around the plant who responded to official coverups and silences by acquiring their own measuring devices and teaching themselves how to use them. They defied a government that at first tried to prohibit nonprofessionals from measuring radiation and later just ignored them.
Almost 14 years after the meltdowns, the citizen scientists persist, fueled by smoldering distrust of authority. While their numbers have dwindled as some grew old or moved away, many like Ms. Kobayashi remain vigilant, eager to make their voices heard or simply reclaim control of lives shattered when towns around the plant were evacuated or contaminated.
Radiation levels in Tsushima remain so high that many residents are still unable to return after being evacuated almost 14 years ago.
They have created new communities with their networks of like-minded people. By filling gaps left by government inaction, they have grown proficient at measuring and mapping invisible radiation, leading to what experts have called a democratization of expertise. This grass-roots embrace of science is an enduring legacy of the Fukushima disaster and a path to self empowerment.

"Around the world, we have seen a growing contempt for expertise, but these citizen scientists are going against that trend," said Kyle Cleveland, a sociologist at Temple University in Tokyo who has researched perceptions of radiation during the Fukushima crisis. "They are using knowledge to understand their environment and claim legitimacy for their grievances."
While the citizen scientists were often the only source of radiation numbers in the months after the meltdowns, these days they play watchdog, verifying the government's figures and providing a level of detail that officials still won't. After falling for several years, radiation outside the plant has plateaued at levels often still many times higher than before the accident.
Some groups have achieved considerable expertise in detecting these invisible particles. One is the Mothers' Radiation Lab Fukushima - Tarachine, started by a group of mothers in the city of Iwaki, an hour's drive south of the plant, to protect their children.
Begun in a single room with three donated measuring machines, Tarachine now occupies almost the entire floor of its building, with 13 salaried staff, a health clinic and a laboratory filled with equipment. Its self-taught technicians, most of them mothers, can measure even tough-to-detect types of radiation. They publish their findings on the group's website.
When the nuclear power plant's reactor buildings started to explode, the group's founder, Kaori Suzuki, was a homemaker whose only outside work had been a brief stint in the fashion industry. Anxious for her teenage daughter, Ms. Suzuki joined protests against the lack of official information before concluding that the best response was to learn to measure radiation herself. When other mothers joined, they chose the name Tarachine (pronounced tah-rah-chee-nay), a term from ancient Japanese poetry used to describe a strong mother figure.
They faced enormous resistance from official scientists dismissive of their efforts and social pressure from fellow residents fearful of radiation-related discrimination similar to that faced by the survivors of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Ms. Suzuki learned to use the machines by deciphering English-language manuals. Once Tarachine's doors opened, demand was overwhelming, as parents brought food from supermarkets and farmers handed over their own produce to be measured.
"Within one month, we had a three-month waiting list," she recalled.
Worries about food declined as radiation levels dropped, but Ms. Suzuki, 59, has taken on other concerns. One is the decision by the Fukushima plant's operator, Tokyo Electric Power Co., to begin releasing into the Pacific Ocean more than a million tons of water that has been treated but remains contaminated. Tarachine now sends out boats.
"We still have to keep verifying the company's claims," Ms. Suzuki said.
In Tsushima, a small village nestled in a narrow valley surrounded by dark peaks, only the area along the main street has been decontaminated. The rest, 98.4 percent of the village's land, remains off-limits with radiation levels that can still reach hundreds of times above normal.
At the height of the accident, a plume from the plant reached Tsushima during a snowstorm, lacing the falling flakes with dangerous isotopes. These soaked into the ground, heavily contaminating the village despite its location 18 miles from the reactors.

While the small central area was reopened two years ago, only five people have returned from a previous population of 1,400. One hoping to restart his life here is Hidenori Konno, 77, who was born and raised in Tsushima. He makes frequent trips back to fix the century-old ryokan inn that has been in his family for generations.
During those visits, Mr. Konno uses a handheld device to map radiation readings in the village. By identifying places to avoid, he hopes to convince former neighbors that it is safe to come back.
 "If we can see where the hot spots are, and know how much risk we're actually taking, then I don't feel as frightened about returning," Mr. Konno said, sitting on a tatami mat in his inn, which sat empty for 12 years while the village was evacuated.
Helping him is Shinzo Kimura, a radiation scientist who is setting up a small lab in an old clay storehouse behind the inn. During the disaster, Dr. Kimura quit his job at a government research institute near Tokyo, which tried to block him from taking measurements around the plant. He moved to Fukushima, where he has taught locals like Mr. Konno how to make radiation-hazard maps.
"Science gives them a way to visualize a radioactive danger that they cannot see, smell or taste," Dr. Kimura said. "It restores what the accident robbed from them, which is an agency over their own lives."
For Ms. Kobayashi, owner of the reopened inn in Odaka, it was her own maps that reassured her about moving back. She said citizen scientists must stay on the lookout for new leaks, with the cleanup expected to take several more decades.
"The radiation is not gone," she said, "nor is the need to protect ourselves."

Robert F. Kennedy Jr., President Trump's health secretary, has long cited the forms of radiation emitted by cellphones, power lines and home appliances as a probable cause of "many of today's chronic diseases," including brain cancer. His Make America Healthy Again campaign has called on federal agencies to assess whether safety rules on these everyday radiations should be tightened.
Mr. Kennedy may preside over the nation's public health policies, but other parts of the Trump administration want to loosen federal restrictions on another type of radiation that is notorious for its powers to sicken and kill.
President Trump has backed both agendas. He supports Mr. Kennedy while also backing moves to ease regulations on the nuclear industry, which the administration seeks to revive after decades of decline. It wants power reactors big and small to electrify his MAGA vision of spurring American industry to greater success.
In a contest of MAGA versus MAHA, of lobbyists versus populists, it seems possible that Mr. Trump's deregulatory push may prevail. That said, specialists in radiation regulation have doubts given the tangled intricacies of the field's science and the history of false starts in the rewriting of its complicated safety rules.
Kathryn A. Higley, president of the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, which has long advised federal agencies, described the Trump inconsistencies as a scientific challenge.
"Like everybody else," she said, "we're trying to learn how to navigate in this new environment and retain our integrity."
Although disparities in federal regulations are nothing new, the administrative bodies that protect Americans from radiation turn out to be riddled with conflicting standards. Exposure rules vary not only among agencies and states, but also occupations and social groups, such as minors and pregnant women.
Rule conflicts, Michael Lewandowski, president of the Health Physics Society, recently told nuclear regulators, "create public confusion and concern."
Experts say the large inconsistencies proposed by the Trump administration could make things worse, further eroding public trust. As an alternative, many back the status quo.
 "The current scientific consensus is well founded," said Christopher M. Collins, a professor of radiology at New York University who studies the impact of radiation on the human body. As for the Trump proposals, he added, "I'd like to think that cooler heads will eventually prevail."
Frank N. von Hippel, a nuclear physicist at Princeton University who advised the Clinton White House, traced the new conflicts to the administration's attacks on scientific advice. For more than a century, it informed not only the White House but regulatory bodies that sought to minimize risks and inconsistencies.
Mr. Trump's approach is "taking us back to the dark ages before there was knowledge-based regulation," he said. "It's threatening our future."
The White House, asked for comment, deferred to a statement from the Department of Health and Human Services, which Mr. Kennedy oversees. A spokeswoman from that department said nothing about the rule conflicts, or their fate, and stated instead that the department "is planning a study of electromagnetic radiation and health research to identify gaps in knowledge."
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, also asked for comment, said in an automated reply that the agency had "ceased normal operations" during the federal government shutdown.
The strong type can cause vomiting, cancer and death over the course of days, weeks or months. The weak type - emitted from cellphones, power lines and microwave ovens, its waves roughly a billion times less powerful - can heat the skin or damage the eye.
The strong type of radiation can deeply penetrate the human body. Called ionizing, it is dangerous because it can produce an ion - a positively charged atom or molecule - that binds to such negatively charged molecules as DNA, the code of life. 
The weak type of radiation, known as nonionizing, arises from such everyday things as radio transmissions. In the case of cellphones, its powers of penetration are so insubstantial that human skin can block the waves.

Washington has long prioritized regulatory limits on the strong type of radiation in an effort to mitigate its significant threats to human health.
During Mr. Trump's first term, however, his regulators backed fringe experts who argued that federal rules on strong radiation should be relaxed. Their ideas went nowhere. Then, in 2023, a lengthy report of Project 2025, the right-wing blueprint for Mr. Trump's presidency, renewed the call for rule loosening.
Dr. von Hippel of Princeton, who has written widely on radiation safety, said the nuclear industry wants fewer restrictions so it can site reactors closer to cities and shrink the size of emergency evacuation zones. The Trump administration is now promoting a new generation of small reactors it sees as powering A.I. data centers, military bases, industrial sites and remote communities.
In July, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission held a public meeting on Mr. Trump's proposed rule abatement. Under discussion was a longstanding tenet of the nuclear status quo - that any amount of radiation exposure, no matter how small, carries a cancer risk.
Edwin Lyman, a nuclear power expert at the Union of Concerned Scientists who participated, said most speakers "were defending the status quo."
While experts see the health risks of weak radiation as comparatively small or nonexistent, critics a decade ago began attacking its implementation in 5G, a new generation of cell network. They called 5G inherently dangerous to humans, especially children.
Undeterred, the Trump administration in 2017 and 2018 sped its deployment. "5G is a big deal," Mr. Trump told reporters in 2019.
Mr. Trump's Federal Communications Commission studied 5G's alleged dangers and in 2020 publicly declared the new technology to be completely safe. Overall, the Trump push led to the building nationwide of hundreds of thousands of 5G towers and antennas.
In turn, Mr. Kennedy, then chairman of Children's Health Defense, began what he called "our national battle to derail Big Telecom's craven scheme to irradiate our children."
In June 2023, as a presidential candidate, he declared that 5G was linked to an epidemic of malignant brain tumors. The next year, Mr. Kennedy spoke at length on "The Joe Rogan Experience" about what he called "the horrendous danger" of Wi-Fi routers.
A few months later, the World Health Organization reported finding no links among cellphones or Wi-Fi and heightened risks of brain cancer.
This year, Mr. Kennedy got off to a fast start as chairman of Mr. Trump's Make America Healthy Again Commission. In May, his initial MAHA report cited "cellphones, Wi-Fi routers, cell towers, and wearables" as potential culprits in childhood ills.
Publicly, the 5G industry kept its opinion to itself, as did a new player. The Trump Organization, weeks after the MAHA report came out, unveiled a new wireless service known as Trump Mobile. The company said it would deliver "Exceptional 5G Coverage to Every Corner of the Country."
In September, Mr. Kennedy's commission released a follow-up MAHA report. It was criticized as sketchy and lacking teeth. David Murphy, a finance director for Mr. Kennedy's presidential campaign, called the report clear evidence that lobbyists "are firmly embedded in the White House."
On radiation, the follow-up report was terse. Its sole reference, like that of the health department's spokeswoman, was to new radiation studies that could "identify gaps in knowledge."
To date, the federal agencies that set nonionizing rules have announced no plans to study the proposed rule tightening, in contrast to the July meeting of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on rule loosening.
 "MAHA has talked a big game," said Lindsey Smith Taillie, a food policy specialist at the University of North Carolina. "But so far it's taken few meaningful steps."
An open question is whether the Trump administration will be able to carry out significant new studies on radiation's health effects given its sweeping cuts to federal science funding. The needed sums are typically large because the science is tricky.
John D. Graham, a radiation policy expert at Indiana University and former president of the Society for Risk Analysis, said the Trump administration's moves on weak and strong radiation would succeed only if the administration can "rally the scientific community to develop risk assessment positions that can drive change."
He argued that, without the endorsement of top radiation experts, the proposed moves would most likely "peter out or get overturned in court or get ignored."
Since the Trump administration has a poor reputation among scientists, Dr. Graham added, "my guess is that neither initiative will go far."

Constellation Energy, the nation's largest nuclear power plant operator, has agreed to buy another electricity producer, Calpine, for $16.4 billion, a deal that shows how fast-rising demand for power, partly a result of the data centers being built for artificial intelligence, is having far-reaching effects on the economy.

The cash-and-stock deal, announced Friday, ranks among the power sector's biggest, and indicates that natural gas is likely to play a larger role than many expected a few years ago in meeting the nation's electricity needs. That could undermine efforts to address climate change unless companies quickly figure out how to capture and store emissions from gas power plants.
The tie-up would broaden Constellation's portfolio as companies like Microsoft, Google and Amazon are scrambling to secure energy for data centers used to run artificial intelligence and other services. Electricity demand is also increasing because of the building of new factories in the United States and greater use of electric vehicles and heat pumps. The growth is reshaping a traditionally sleepy industry that has not been accustomed to turbocharged growth.
"Lots of people who were not paying any attention to electricity a year ago are now trying to figure out how to participate in meeting what seems to be inevitable growth in demand," said Daniel Yergin, the vice chairman of S&P Global, who won a Pulitzer Prize for his book "The Prize: The Epic Quest For Oil, Money and Power."
Calpine, which is based in Houston and privately held, operates a large fleet of natural gas power plants in several states as well as the Geysers geothermal energy complex in California.
Constellation, which is based in Baltimore, said in a statement that it expected Calpine's natural gas assets to help ensure the reliability of the electric grid. The combination also would broaden the company's presence in Texas, where power demand is growing quickly, and add more renewable energy to its portfolio.
"We believe that natural gas and geothermal, along with nuclear, will be critically important for the nation," Joseph Dominguez, chief executive of Constellation, said on a call with investors and analysts on Friday morning.
He added that it was important to ensure that energy resources were not only sustainable, but reliable as well. "We believe that natural gas and clean energy, blended together, will be very attractive to customers," Mr. Dominguez said.
Constellation's stock price soared more than 20 percent in early trading on Friday and closed the day up 25 percent, an unusually large jump for an acquiring company. Its shares had already more than doubled over the past year as expectations for U.S. power demand growth rose.
Constellation would pay $4.5 billion in cash and assume roughly $12.7 billion of Calpine's debt as part of the deal.
Nuclear power plants, which can operate around the clock without releasing planet-warming emissions, have been among the early beneficiaries of booming investment in artificial intelligence. Constellation agreed last year to spend $1.6 billion to restart a nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island near Harrisburg, Pa. - a project for which Microsoft is effectively footing the bill.
But there are only a few mothballed nuclear plants that can be restarted. Some companies are also betting on new, smaller reactors, but those are not expected to begin producing meaningful amounts of power for at least several years if all goes well.
As a result of those challenges, many energy and tech companies are increasingly looking to natural gas, even though its use releases carbon dioxide and methane, two leading greenhouse gases that are warming the planet.
"It's going to be hard for the utilities to provide the power that these data centers need without gas," said Andrew Gillick, an energy strategist for the analytics firm Enverus.
Power demand from data centers is poised to increase 15 percent a year on average through the end of the decade, Goldman Sachs estimated last year.
Andrew Novotny, chief executive of Calpine, said the combined company would be able to invest in new power generation. "Together, we will be better positioned to bring accelerated investment in everything from zero-emission nuclear to battery storage that will power our economy in a way that puts people and our environment first," he said in a statement.
A diverse group of power plants could let the new company be more effective in how it manages its resources, depending on how electricity needs change. Adding more natural gas to its portfolio would, however, expose Constellation to more risk related to fluctuating commodity prices, Enverus said.
The deal with Constellation is the culmination of a big turnaround for Calpine, which had come under pressure in recent years as California and other states sought to move away from fossil fuels. A group of investors including Energy Capital Partners took Calpine private several years ago in a deal valued at $5.6 billion, not including debt.
The companies said they expected the transaction to close within a year, subject to regulatory approvals. Constellation would address any potential concerns raised by antitrust officials about its market power by selling assets, Mr. Dominguez said.

President Trump is poised to preside over a renewable energy boom. Yes, really.
The administration and its allies in Congress have rolled back clean energy tax credits and thrown up roadblocks to renewable energy projects - efforts that, in the long run, will mean fewer wind and solar farms will be built than otherwise would have.
But any meaningful slowdown in the growth of renewable energy and battery storage in the United States is likely to take a few years. That is because companies are racing to install solar panels, wind turbines and batteries the size of shipping containers before federal tax credits expire or become harder to claim.
The pipeline is so big that analysts widely expect the United States to add record - or near-record - amounts of renewable energy and batteries through 2027. BloombergNEF, a research firm, recently raised its forecast for how much wind, solar and batteries the country would add next year by more than 10 percent.

"There's this huge hurry-up that is taking place," said Thomas Byrne, chief executive of New York-based CleanCapital, which develops, owns and operates solar and battery storage projects.
Wind and solar projects must be under construction by July to be eligible for federal tax credits that Congress voted this summer to eliminate, years earlier than previously required. (Battery installations have longer to get started.)
To hit that deadline, many developers have ordered custom power transformers - devices used to increase or decrease voltage - solar panels and other equipment much sooner than they normally would have. Placing such orders is one way to demonstrate to the Internal Revenue Service that a project is underway.
Only relatively big companies can afford to spend such huge sums upfront, and analysts expect them to start buying smaller projects whose backers are strapped for cash.
To ensure its projects would still qualify for credits, CleanCapital this summer bought about $25 million worth of solar panels it does not yet need. The company plans to store the panels in a warehouse it is renting in San Bernardino, Calif., for $145,000 a month.
 "This rush is real," Jennifer Granholm, the energy secretary for President Joseph R. Biden Jr., told reporters recently in New York. "You'll see an uptick in the next two years, and then you'll see a diminishment after that, unless something changes."
That so much renewable energy is poised to be built despite federal opposition reflects just how much momentum the sector has - not just because of subsidies, but because there is tremendous demand for new sources of energy. Solar and batteries can be installed much faster than natural gas and nuclear power plants. Solar and batteries have also become cheaper, while the cost of building gas power plants has soared.
This year, renewable energy and batteries will make up around 93 percent of the capacity added to U.S. grids, according to the federal Energy Information Administration.
"We have never seen this kind of demand, ever," said Sandhya Ganapathy, chief executive of EDP Renewables North America, a leading energy developer. For that reason, the company's development plan looks much as it did before Congress rolled back the tax credits, she said.
That said, the Trump administration's efforts to stymie renewable energy will take a toll. Beyond tax credits, there are federal permits, which Mr. Trump has said his administration will not approve for wind or "farmer destroying Solar."
The Paris-based International Energy Agency recently almost halved its expectations for how much solar and wind energy capacity the United States will add over the next five years. The bulk of that effect will be felt beginning in 2028, the last full year of Mr. Trump's presidency.
Between permits and the time it takes to connect to the grid, companies can pull forward only so many projects. Already, some smaller solar firms are laying off staff or preparing to shut down.
Some developers are focusing on building batteries that charge when electricity is cheap and plentiful and release it when energy demand soars. Such batteries are in high demand to help balance the wind and solar projects built in recent years.
Meantime, offshore wind has become all but untouchable, largely because of the administration's attacks on the industry.
"This is the death knell of offshore wind," said David Giroux, chief investment officer for T. Rowe Price Investment Management. "Any time you increase uncertainty around the ultimate return on an investment, you either have to get a higher return to compensate you for that risk, or more likely you just won't take that risk in the first place."
Ultimately, the loss of renewable energy tax credits is likely to raise energy bills, because it can take years to build alternatives like gas or nuclear power plants. Existing gas plants are also likely to be used more.
"There's not going to be as much supply as expected," Mr. Byrne of CleanCapital said. "Necessarily, prices will go up

As his electricity bill soared in recent years, Martec Washington decided not to replace his broken-down car and started riding the bus. He has taken on multiple jobs, including scheduling surgeries and teaching hip-hop fitness classes. And he is trying to use less energy.
Yet his electric utility bill keeps climbing. In some months, he owes his utility company more than the $750 rent on his house in Charleston, W.Va.
"Electric bills shouldn't be equal to rent or mortgage," said Mr. Washington, a community activist who in 2022 lost the Democratic primary for mayor. "The bill is freaking ridiculous."
West Virginia is awash in coal, natural gas and oil, making it the fifth-leading producer of energy in the United States. Yet the state's electricity costs have risen much faster than the national average. Some energy experts say West Virginia is a harbinger of what could happen as President Trump champions fossil fuels and throttles renewable energy.
Trump administration officials have ordered aging coal power plants to stay open and pushed for the quick approval of new oil and natural gas projects while denying permits or ordering work to be halted on solar and wind energy projects.
On Monday, the Energy Department said it would spend $625 million to upgrade coal power plants and the Interior Department said it would make 13.1 million acres of federal land available to coal mining.
In the past few decades, generating electricity from coal has become much more expensive than other energy sources like natural gas, wind and solar. Coal plants are also relatively inefficient and expensive to maintain.
Mr. Trump's coal push comes as monthly utility bills are rising from coast to coast. People are paying more because utilities are having to upgrade aging grids and prepare for extreme weather driven by climate change. They are also investing billions of dollars in new power plants and lines to meet the voracious energy demands of artificial intelligence data centers.
In West Virginia, the situation is even worse.
Over the past 15 years, electricity rates in the state have risen almost twice as fast as the national average.
Many residents are buckling under the strain. American Electric Power, a company that owns two utilities in the state, told state regulators last year that nearly one in every five of its customers in West Virginia, or 84,000 households, is typically behind on the electric bill every month.
Regulatory filings show that those two utilities, Appalachian Power and Wheeling Power, cut power to 56,000 households for not paying what they owed in 2023, the most recent year for which data were available. That was up from 3,300 during the pandemic in 2020. The company's disconnections were more than 10 times that of a typical state, said Mark Wolfe, executive director of the National Energy Assistance Directors Association.
"Shutting them off from power is not a humane solution," Mr. Wolfe said. "It forces people to choose between buying food and paying their energy bill."
Appalachian Power is locked into contracts that require it to buy coal at relatively high prices. Rates are also high because they include the cost of the expensive turbines and other equipment that burn coal to generate electricity.
Coal provides about 86 percent of West Virginia's electricity, a number that has not decreased much even as the United States has reduced its reliance on coal to less than 20 percent of all electricity, from two-thirds several decades ago.
The state's utilities could invest in new wind and solar farms that generate power more cheaply, but the utility and its customers would still be paying off its coal plants for years to come.
"There was a time some years ago when West Virginia had some of the lowest rates in the country," said Jim Kotcon, chairman of the West Virginia Sierra Club. Now, he added, the state is in such a pickle that "even the utilities will testify to the Legislature that they have no plans to build a new coal plant."
But Gov. Patrick Morrisey, a Republican ally of Mr. Trump's, remains committed to coal. "Baseload generation from coal, natural gas and nuclear are critical to our way of life," he said this month, a reference to the amount of power needed to meet fundamental demands.
People waiting to receive food donations in Charleston. West Virginia's electricity costs have risen much faster than the national average as coal power has become more expensive.
In June 2010, West Virginia's electricity rates were more than 30 percent lower than the national average. That gap closed to just 10 percent this June, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.
A household in West Virginia using 1,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity - a rough estimate of an average American home's monthly consumption - will pay almost $160 a month, compared with the national average of $175.
But that does not account for weather or the insulation of homes. Actual electricity bills for many West Virginians can run into the hundreds of dollars when it is very hot or cold.
In addition, residents here usually earn much less than elsewhere. The median household income in West Virginia last year was about $61,000, compared with about $84,000 nationally.
"West Virginia is high up on that list of energy burden," said Frank Rambo, executive director of Horizon Climate Initiative, an environmental nonprofit based in Charlottesville, Va.
For Mr. Washington, 37, it's a big hardship. He lives in the neighborhood where he grew up, a low-income community near state government offices.
His city is home to the University of Charleston, hip coffee shops and a restaurant helmed by a James Beard Award-winning chef. But Mr. Washington can't enjoy any of that.
In December, he skipped paying his natural gas bill to cover the nearly $1,000 he owed for electricity.
"I chose to pay a higher electric bill because at least with that one, I can turn the heaters on when we're in the house and turn them off when we don't need them," Mr. Washington said.
But when he was out one day, the home was so cold that a pipe burst because his gas had been shut off.
The Public Service Commission of West Virginia, which regulates Appalachian, Wheeling and other investor-owned utilities, declined to comment for this article.
Across the country, many are in arrears on their electric bills. Missing payments totaled $14.5 billion at the end of 2023, up from roughly $10.5 billion in 2021, according to the National Energy Assistance Directors Association.
A record seven million people have sought help from the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program. But recent federal budget cuts have meant fewer dollars are available to them.
Electric bills are climbing for various reasons. In addition to increased spending on maintenance by utilities, the Covid-19 pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine disrupted supply chains and drove up prices for coal, natural gas and other fossil fuels. Electricity made from burning such fuels is generally more expensive than from renewable sources, but it becomes much more so during geopolitical crises.
Though West Virginia has a lot of coal, some mining companies have filed for bankruptcy protection or shut mines because of falling demand for their products nationally.
At the same time, state regulators have demanded that West Virginia's utilities rely more on coal plants, which cost consumers hundreds of millions of dollars in construction, maintenance and operation expenses. That led Appalachian Power to enter the expensive long-term contracts for coal.
In addition, the war in Ukraine has hit the state hard, said Robert Williams, the state official who represents utility customers before the West Virginia Public Service Commission.
"There was a global squeeze in the natural gas market and coal market," Mr. Williams said. And because West Virginia's utilities are so reliant on coal, the suppliers "had them over a barrel."
Given the state's coal mines, West Virginia's elected officials are reluctant to embrace renewable energy. Its vast mountain ranges are not ideal for large solar farms, though wind power has significant room to grow. The state has no nuclear power plants.
Appalachian Power, the American Electric Power utility that is the state's largest, said it was "making significant investments in West Virginia to enhance reliability and improve service for all our customers."
The utility said it was reviewing and proposing ways to reduce customer bills, including by helping the state attract more businesses so the cost of running the system could be spread over more customers.
The utility "is committed to working with state leaders to ensure we can help them achieve their policy goals, while always keeping customer affordability at the forefront of the conversation," Aaron Walker, Appalachian's president and chief operating officer, said in a statement.
Drew Galang, a spokesman for Governor Morrisey, said West Virginia could generate more power than it used. By using more of that capacity, including by selling more electricity to other states and data centers, it hopes to lower energy prices for its residents.
Mr. Morrisey has signed legislation to encourage the development of data centers and microgrids to help power them. Officials also plan to push for upgrades to existing power plants to make them more efficient, reducing costs.
"In order to meet these goals, West Virginia will consider all of its options, including nuclear power," Mr. Galang said. "We must focus on providing reliable and consistent baseload generation. Coal and natural gas generation provides security, which is very important for consumers and businesses."
But to some energy experts, West Virginia's experience highlights the potential pitfalls of investing more in fossil fuel power plants, coal in particular. Customers could get stuck paying for them for a while.
Since 2012, U.S. coal plants have collectively lost about $14 billion, according to RMI, a research group formerly known as the Rocky Mountain Institute. Many of those losses were borne by residents and businesses through their electricity bills.
In West Virginia, electricity bills will probably remain high because customers have to pay the remaining debt on coal plants along with the cost of any new energy sources.
"We're going to have the coal plants here since they're on our backs for the next few decades," Mr. Williams said.

Spain's power company, Red Eléctrica, proudly declared on April 16 that enough renewable energy had been generated to cover demand. "The ecological transition is moving forward," it said.
Less than two weeks later, Spain and Portugal experienced an 18-hour blackout that disrupted daily life, shutting down businesses and schools and crippling trains and mobile networks.
Officials have given few details on the cause of the outage. But the incident exposed how Spain and Portugal, promoted as success stories in Europe's renewable energy transition, are also uniquely vulnerable to outages, given their relative isolation from the rest of the continent's energy supply.
"This disruption serves as a clear warning," wrote Pratheeksha Ramdas, an analyst at Rystad Energy, a consulting firm. "Future grid failures could have even more severe consequences," she added.
What role may reliance on renewable energy have played?
The widespread outage raises questions about the resilience of the power infrastructure in Spain and Portugal - and to an extent, Europe. The two countries have invested heavily in building renewable energy sources like wind turbines and solar farms.
More than half of Spain's electricity came from renewable energy as of last year, up from about a quarter 15 years ago. That rapid increase has put Spain at the forefront of Europe's transition to renewable energy and led to much lower electricity prices and less reliance on fossil fuels.
This shift, though, may also have made the grid more prone to the sort of disruption that occurred on Monday. "When you have more renewables on the grid," Ms. Ramdas said, "then your grid is more sensitive for these kind of disturbances."
Old-line generation sources like gas turbines and nuclear plants have a spinning momentum known as inertia, which helps buffer the fluctuations that are more common with intermittent sources like wind and solar power.
When the Spanish grid became unstable about midday on Monday, it might have been easier to keep the system functioning if conventional power sources like natural gas or nuclear turbines had a larger presence, analysts say.
 "This stored rotating energy can help maintain grid frequency until sufficient backup capacity is brought online," said Henning Gloystein, director for energy at Eurasia Group, a research firm.
The blackout could bolster the argument for retaining conventional generation sources, Mr. Gloystein said. He noted that Germany plans to build gas-fired power plants as backups for renewable energy.
How is Europe preparing for renewable power?
As renewable energy expands across Europe, the need for grid upgrades and storage has become critical. But over the last 15 years, investment in grids has lagged behind investment in alternative energy, which has doubled in that period, according to the International Energy Agency.
Spain requires more investments in grid infrastructure and additional storage facilities, like batteries to provide backup power, said Federico Santi, a senior analyst at Eurasia Group.
"So they're almost a victim of their own success," he said.
There are also calls for more investment in critical energy infrastructure beyond renewable energy. Another major power outage occurred in March at London's Heathrow Airport, when a fire shut down the airport, one of the world's busiest, for a full day, disrupting more than 1,000 flights. The incident raised questions about whether there had been enough investment in key infrastructure.
What is an 'energy island'?
Spain and Portugal are often said to be on an energy island. Spain is connected to France by power cables, but the volumes of electricity that can flow through these conduits is a fraction of what can move between Germany and its neighbors. As for Portugal, it is completely dependent on Spain.
These conduits, known as interconnectors, help balance power systems on a daily basis and, during crises, serve as emergency sources of energy. During the blackout, France cut them off to prevent the disruption from spreading to Central Europe, according to Rystad. That worsened Spain's power deficit and further squeezed Portugal.
As the situation stabilized, France resumed electricity exports to Spain, which helped the country restart its grid. Had the Iberian Peninsula been better connected to the rest of the continent, it might have been able to compensate more quickly for the power loss.
Several projects to improve connectivity are likely to gain momentum after the outage, Mr. Santi said, adding that pressure may increase to delay or cancel the phaseout of nuclear power stations in Spain, which was on track to be done by 2035.
Will this be a setback for renewable energy?
European countries are realizing that the push for more renewable energy and electrification of economies will be jeopardized unless they spend more on grids and other related infrastructure like batteries and other sources of energy that can be quickly tapped.
More thought and money will need to go into managing renewable energy because the power produced by these sources waxes and wanes with the wind and sun.
"Pursuing net zero does not have to lead to power outages," Georg Zachmann, a senior fellow at Bruegel, a research organization, said, referring to cutting emissions.

President Trump has fired a member of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the independent federal agency that oversees America's nuclear reactors. It is the president's latest dismissal in defiance of job protections established by Congress.
The former commissioner, Christopher Hanson, received an email from a White House official on Friday saying that he had been terminated "effective immediately," without providing a reason for the termination. Mr. Hanson, who led the agency during the entirety of the Biden administration, said in a statement on Monday that Mr. Trump had fired him without cause "contrary to existing law and longstanding precedent regarding removal of independent agency appointees."
The dismissal came after Mr. Trump signed several executive orders aimed at cutting safety regulations for nuclear power plants. One order directs the regulatory commission to streamline its rules and to take no more than 18 months to approve applications for new reactors. The order also urges the independent agency to consider lowering its safety limits for radiation exposure, saying that current limits are too strict and go beyond what is needed to protect human health.
Mr. Trump's firing of Mr. Hanson was unusual: The president's efforts to purge agency appointees have been aimed at those picked by former President Joseph R. Biden Jr., but Mr. Trump himself first appointed Mr. Hanson to the commission in 2020. Mr. Biden elevated Mr. Hanson to chairman on his first day in office and subsequently appointed three of the five members of the commission.
Courts have blocked some previous efforts by Mr. Trump to fire leaders of independent agencies. On Friday, a federal judge in Maryland reversed Mr. Trump's firings of the three Democratic members of the Consumer Product Safety Commission, which monitors the safety of products such as toys, cribs and electronics. Last month, another federal judge ruled that Mr. Trump broke the law when he fired Democratic members of the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, an independent civil liberties watchdog.
In both cases, Mr. Trump had purported to fire the officials without cause, while statutory job protections established by Congress protect those officials from being fired without a valid reason, usually "neglect of duty or malfeasance." The law establishing the Nuclear Regulatory Commission says that a commissioner can be removed "for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office."

When it passed in 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act was hailed by Democrats and environmentalists as the most important piece of climate legislation in American history.
But today, as House Republicans debate whether to repeal the hundreds of billions of dollars that the law provides for solar panels, electric vehicles and other technologies designed to fight global warming, supporters of the law rarely mention the planet.
Instead, the law's defenders argue that the tax credits for battery factories or wind farms are creating manufacturing jobs around the country and will reduce electricity prices and help the United States to compete in an A.I. race against China.
It's a sign of how quickly climate has faded from the national agenda under President Trump, who has dismissed the risks of global warming and has rooted out any mention of climate change among federal agencies.
"We're no longer talking about the environment," said Chad Farrell, the founder of Encore Renewable Energy, based in Vermont. "We're talking dollars and cents."
Mr. Farrell was among the solar industry leaders who met in Washington last week to lobby Congress to preserve many of the law's clean energy provisions, saying they were essential for the U.S. economy.
The fate of the clean energy tax credits is being hotly debated on Capitol Hill. The most recent version of the House Republicans' far-reaching domestic policy bill would quickly phase out the biggest incentives for technologies like electric vehicles, batteries, wind turbines, solar panels and nuclear reactors and restrict tax breaks for domestic manufacturing. Some conservative Republicans want to entirely repeal the Inflation Reduction Act.
On the other side, three dozen Republicans in the House and four in the Senate say they want to preserve at least some incentives, such as those for nuclear power or domestic manufacturing, to protect jobs and bolster U.S. energy security.
In their pitch to lawmakers, many renewable energy companies have cast their industries as essential for achieving national energy dominance, a goal repeatedly mentioned by Mr. Trump.
One common argument: America's demand for electricity is soaring, driven by a boom in A.I. data centers, and it's difficult to build enough gas-fired power plants to supply all the extra power that the nation needs. Adding more solar, wind and batteries could be the country's best hope for averting energy shortages, since they are relatively quick to construct, proponents say.
"Maybe before it was tie-dye T-shirts and hugging trees, but today we are a mature energy sector and a critical part of energizing America," said Constantino Nicolaou, the chief executive of PanelClaw, a solar company based in Massachusetts that supplies mounting systems for rooftop solar projects.
"Yes, we love the environment, but don't look at us like the environmentalists," Mr. Nicolaou said.
Other companies warn that thousands of good-paying manufacturing jobs could disappear if Congress repealed the tax credits. Since the Inflation Reduction Act passed, businesses have announced more than $843 billion in clean energy investments, from wind farms in Wyoming to battery factories in Georgia. More than three-fourths of that spending is expected to occur in Republican-controlled districts.
If Republicans phase out the tax credits, "nearly 300 U.S. factories - mostly in red states - could close or never open," said Abigail Ross Hopper, chief executive of the Solar Energy Industries Association, a trade group.
On Monday, the solar association released a report estimating that 292,000 jobs and $220 billion in local investments might be lost if Congress ended the tax breaks for solar power, while warning of blackouts and higher electricity bills.
The report does not mention climate change. It's a marked contrast with 2022, when the solar association released an analysis showing that additional solar deployment brought on by the Inflation Reduction Act would offset more than 655 million tons of carbon dioxide, the greenhouse gas that is driving global warming.
Even many environmental groups defending the law now sound like a green-tinged version of the Chamber of Commerce.
Repealing the tax credits "means higher gas and electricity costs for struggling families and businesses, tanking the U.S. manufacturing resurgence and ceding leadership to China," said Sara Chieffo, the vice president of government affairs at the League of Conservation Voters.
Other companies, including makers of electric vehicles, are trying to persuade lawmakers that the United States could lose a technology race with China if the law were gutted.
"We can't lose sight of the fact that the automotive industry is global, and consumers all over the world are increasingly preferring electric vehicles for a variety of reasons," said Michael Tubman, director of federal affairs at Lucid Motors, a start-up manufacturing electric cars in Arizona. "The American auto industry is in fierce competition with foreign competitors, particularly Chinese automakers."
The shift away from focusing on climate change is a throwback to an earlier era of clean energy politics, said Alex Trembath, the deputy director of the Breakthrough Institute, an environmental research organization.
For many years, subsidies for new energy technologies like wind, solar and nuclear power had broad bipartisan support and were often renewed under Republican presidents, in part because they were seen as essential to accelerate technological innovation and improve U.S. energy security.
That changed during the Biden administration, when Democrats made fighting climate change a top political priority and dramatically expanded the tax credits as part of a push to quickly pivot the U.S. economy away from fossil fuels.
"Once all these tax credits started getting described as once-in-a-generation climate policy, that went a long ways toward turning Republicans away," Mr. Trembath said. But in the wake of Mr. Trump's victory in the 2024 election, he has written, climate change looks less like a winning issue for Democrats.
Whether Republicans are swayed by the economic arguments for the Inflation Reduction Act remains to be seen. Conservative critics have pushed back hard, saying that clean energy subsidies could cost taxpayers trillions of dollars.
"The Inflation Reduction Act has ballooned into one of the biggest government boondoggles in history," said Thomas J. Pyle, president of the American Energy Alliance, a conservative research group focused on energy. "That's real money that could be returned to taxpayers, fueling private-sector innovation, job creation and consumer-driven growth instead of funneling taxpayer dollars into a narrow, government-directed vision of the economy."
Some Senate Republicans have suggested phasing out the subsidies for wind and solar - on the grounds that those industries are mature and don't need further help - while maintaining tax credits for earlier-stage technologies like advanced nuclear reactors or enhanced geothermal plants.
That could result in more planet-warming emissions. An analysis by the Rhodium Group, a research firm, found that repealing tax credits for electric cars, wind turbines and solar panels could lead to hundreds of millions of tons of extra carbon dioxide in the atmosphere each year by 2035.
Yet others say that the broader effect that the tax credits would have on emissions has been overstated. That's because many solar and wind projects across the country are currently being held up by delays in local permitting or regulations that make it difficult to build large transmission lines, blunting the law's climate impact.
"There are a lot of reforms we could make that would have a much bigger impact on decarbonization than the I.R.A.," said Devin Hartman, director of energy and environmental policy at the R Street Institute, a center-right think tank. "In some ways the fight over subsidies has hijacked that conversation."
Whatever happens to the Inflation Reduction Act, many supporters say it was a promising attempt at creating a durable climate policy in the United States.
Before the law, climate activists often favored restrictions and penalties, such as taxes on emissions from oil, gas and coal. But countries, like Canada and Australia, that enacted such policies later overturned them because they were unpopular.
The Inflation Reduction Act was designed to be a "carrot" rather than a "stick," said Leah Stokes, a professor at the University of California, Santa Barbara, who helped craft parts of the law. It led to investment, and that has made the policies stickier.
"Climate policy is hard," Ms. Stokes said. "We're trying to wean ourselves off a product that is represented by the most powerful industry on the planet." But the tax incentives for clean energy, she added, still have a better shot at surviving "than anything else ever has."
Referring to the law's fate in Congress, Ms. Stokes said, "It's not dead yet.

To hear Trump administration officials and many energy executives tell it, the United States is on the precipice of a new golden age for natural gas that will be driven in large part by the voracious power needs of data centers.
But turning natural gas into electricity requires giant metal turbines that are increasingly difficult to secure. Companies that haven't already reserved this equipment, which can weigh as much as a large airplane and cost hundreds of millions of dollars, are facing waits of three or four years, about twice as long as just a year earlier.
The cost of building gas power plants has also soared - so much so that in some parts of the country, solar panels and batteries are likely to be cheaper, energy executives and consultants said. By some estimates, it now costs two or three times as much to build a gas-fired power plant as it did a few years ago.
The challenge of securing enough gas turbines is one of the clearest examples of how booming investment in artificial intelligence is reshaping the electric power industry, overwhelming suppliers and upending longstanding notions of what makes sense financially.
It's also a reminder of the gap that often exists between the plans and goals of politicians and executives and the reality on the ground.
U.S. gas demand is clearly rising, all the more so because of the data centers needed to train and use chatbots and other forms of A.I. But there are limits to how much more gas the country can use - limits that elected officials and energy tycoons cannot easily wish away.
GE Vernova, the biggest manufacturer of large gas turbines in the world, is among those betting that the recent flurry of interest in gas power will last. The company, formed last year in the breakup of General Electric, is spending more than $160 million to overhaul its gas turbine plant on the edge of Greenville, S.C.
By the end of next year, the 1.5-million-square-foot factory is expected to churn out about 35 percent more gas turbines. The building is a whirring, beeping expanse of partly automated assembly lines interspersed with metal turbine components.
 "More electrons are going to be created from gas," Scott Strazik, chief executive of GE Vernova, said in a recent interview. "Appetite is very real."
About this time last year, interest in natural gas to power data centers picked up, catching much of the energy industry off guard.
Tech giants like Microsoft and Google pledged years ago to lower their emissions. But as it has become clearer how much and how quickly their energy needs will grow, companies have turned to gas. When burned, natural gas produces carbon dioxide, the leading cause of climate change. But gas plants can be built faster than nuclear power plants and operate all day, unlike wind and solar energy.
As sales of turbines climbed, so did wait times and prices. It takes about four months for GE Vernova to assemble the turbines used in power plants. But that clock starts only after the company has received all the components, like the dense metal fins that catch hot air inside the turbine, causing a rotor to spin.
These days, the backlog is so severe as to be reminiscent of the snarled supply chains of the pandemic, which constrained production of cars, medical devices and much more.
Between those delays and the time it takes to build a power plant, a company starting from scratch today would probably not have a new gas plant running before 2030. Other critical electrical equipment like transformers is also harder to get.
By comparison, a large solar project that includes batteries to store energy for use in the evening could reasonably be completed in three years, said Jesse Noffsinger, a partner at the consulting firm McKinsey & Company.
Chris Wright, the energy secretary, said the Trump administration was encouraging power equipment suppliers to increase U.S. manufacturing capacity. In an interview, he also floated the possibility of invoking the Defense Production Act, which authorizes the president to extend loans and take other steps to encourage companies to produce critical equipment. President Trump used the law, enacted in 1950, to boost production of things like ventilators during the pandemic.
Mr. Wright, who previously led an oil and gas company, said he expected natural gas to soon meet about half the country's electricity needs, up from 43 percent last year. As for wind and solar, "they're going to continue to play some role," Mr. Wright said. "But are they going to be backbones of an electricity grid? Never."
Mr.Wright is much more optimistic than other energy experts were about gas. Consulting firms like McKinsey and Rystad Energy expect gas power's share of the U.S. electricity market to remain relatively steady as renewables grow more quickly.
It is hard to compare the cost of gas power with that of solar panels or wind turbines and batteries. That is because it is not always sunny or windy, meaning other power sources are sometimes needed to complement renewables. Gas costs also add up over time and can spike during crises, as they did after Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine. By contrast, solar and wind farms cost relatively little to operate once they are built.
Generally speaking, building a gas power plant can now be about as expensive as installing solar panels paired with batteries, according to Rystad, when including tax credits that apply to renewable energy and storage. One big factor is that gas turbines now cost about 50 percent more than they did just 10 months ago, according to the investment bank Jefferies.
"We're in this weird no man's land where it's very profitable to run a plant and it's clear we're going to need more electricity," Mr. Noffsinger of McKinsey said of gas plants. But in some markets, he added, it is unclear whether building new ones will make financial sense.
Lawmakers in Texas, which gets about 30 percent of its electricity from renewable energy, have sought to ensure gas plants get built anyway. The state's Senate recently passed a bill aimed at ensuring that half of any new generation capacity comes from sources other than wind, solar and batteries. The House has not yet taken up the bill.
"My biggest concern is: How big? How long?" Bill Newsom, chief executive of another gas turbine manufacturer, Mitsubishi Power Americas, said of the current flurry of interest in gas. "I lose sleep over it every night."
This year, 93 percent of the electricity capacity added to U.S. grids will be renewable energy and battery storage, according to the Energy Information Administration. Gas will account for just 7 percent.
S&P Global Commodity Insights recently estimated that by 2040, the United States would need to add at least nine times as much renewable energy and batteries as gas generation capacity to meet new electricity demand. That is partly because many customers prefer renewable energy, and various bottlenecks are slowing the construction of gas-fired power plants.
But forecasts vary widely, even over just the next few years. Complicating matters is that utilities have often overstated power needs. From 2012 to 2023, utility planners overestimated electricity demand by 23 percent, on average, in their 10-year forecasts, according to RMI, a nonprofit research organization that aims to reduce emissions.
Joseph Dominguez, who runs the country's largest nuclear power plant operator, is among those who question how big the gas power boom will ultimately be. His company, Constellation Energy, struck a $16.4 billion deal in January to buy Calpine, which owns many gas power plants.
"But that's a very different thing than saying that I would invest to replicate that fleet today," Mr. Dominguez said. He pulled up a chart on his tablet showing how much scientists expect global temperatures to rise in the coming decades. Last year was the hottest on record.
"This world portends to be quite ugly for its inhabitants and will drive political outcomes that are radically different than those which we're discussing today," Mr. Dominguez said.

In less than three weeks, President Trump has thrown the U.S. clean energy industry into chaos, with much of the economic damage hitting Republican states and districts.
In a quest to eliminate any funding linked to climate change, the Trump administration has frozen federal grants for everything from battery factories to electric school buses and issued executive orders that have halted federal approvals for wind and solar projects.
Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress are also working to repeal the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act, which is projected to pour hundreds of billions of dollars over the next decade into low-carbon energy technologies through tax credits, loans and grants.
So far, Republican-voting communities have benefited the most from that law. In the nearly three years since it was passed, private companies chasing the law's tax breaks have announced plans to spend $165.8 billion to build factories that make solar panels, wind turbines, electric vehicles and more, according to new data from Atlas Public Policy, a research firm. Roughly 80 percent of those investments are in Republican congressional districts, where they are creating a once-in-a-generation manufacturing boom.
The Inflation Reduction Act, along with a separate 2021 bipartisan infrastructure law, also provided tens of billions of dollars in grants that have since been awarded by the federal government to private companies, states and nonprofit organizations. These are legally binding obligations that have allowed companies to make investments, sign leases and hire workers, with the expectation that they would be reimbursed by the government.
Two federal judges have ordered the Trump administration to end its freeze and release money from programs authorized by Congress, but there is evidence that several agencies are still blocking funding.
The uncertainty is delaying projects and halting investments in areas that voted for Mr. Trump. In Montana, a biofuels plant did not receive on time a $782 million payment it was owed, the first part of a $1.67 billion federal loan guarantee. In Georgia, $1 billion in projects to modernize the power grid are on hold. In Nevada, a half-dozen large solar projects on federal lands are caught in a permitting freeze.
The upheaval has put Republicans in the tricky position of defending a White House that deems money for clean energy a "waste of taxpayer dollars" while working behind the scenes to protect their towns from the loss of new manufacturing jobs.
 "This is where we get a test of whether the Republican Party is a real political party serving its constituents, or a personality cult," said Jason Walsh, executive director of the BlueGreen Alliance, a coalition of labor unions and environmental advocacy groups.
"I expect thousands of people to be laid off, I expect workers to be furloughed, and I expect construction projects to halt," Mr. Walsh said.
The political turmoil could put planned manufacturing projects at risk, analysts said. Of the nearly $30 billion in clean technology factories that were scheduled to come online in 2025 - including manufacturing facilities for solar, wind, batteries and electric vehicles - more than half are now predicted to face delays or cancellations, according to a new report by BloombergNEF, a research firm.

That's not solely because of Mr. Trump. Some factories were already struggling with weaker-than-expected demand for electric vehicles, rising costs or foreign competition.
But many manufacturers now face "significant political uncertainty" on top of that, as companies wonder whether the Trump administration will repeal or modify federal loans and tax incentives, said Antoine Vagneur-Jones, head of trade and supply chains at BloombergNEF.
"Bringing a lot of this manufacturing back to the United States would be tricky even in the best case," Mr. Vagneur-Jones said. "You need massive amounts of political determination and policy clarity to pull this off. And when that's lacking, things start to get very messy."
At the Environmental Protection Agency, programs funded through the Inflation Reduction Act remain paused despite the recent court orders, according to internal emails. That included grants to states for reducing air pollution at ports and schools, monitoring pollution levels in neighborhoods next to industrial facilities and installing solar panels in low-income communities. And at the Energy Department, employees said money for various grants and awards was still frozen.
The Interior Department has stopped permitting for solar and wind projects on public lands and waters for at least 60 days, saying it was conducting a review. At the Army Corps of Engineers, permitting for 168 renewable energy projects was paused last week. On Thursday that pause was lifted, but not for wind power projects, said Doug Garman, an agency spokesman.
The White House declined to comment. Neither the E.P.A. nor the Department of Energy responded to requests to explain why they halted legally binding contracts despite the judge's order.
The uncertainty over whether Republicans might repeal major clean-energy incentives to pay for Mr. Trump's tax cuts and immigration policies is also making investors nervous.
In the Midwest, a Canadian solar manufacturer called Heliene that has already built one factory in Minnesota has held off on deciding whether to build a larger solar cell factory in the region, citing the possibility that Congress might modify key manufacturing tax credits.
In the Northeast, offshore wind companies are pulling back plans for multibillion-dollar investments after Mr. Trump issued a sweeping executive order halting approvals for turbines in the ocean. On Monday, New Jersey abandoned plans to award new offshore wind contracts after Shell withdrew from the most promising project.
While many planned offshore wind farms would be in Democratic-led states like New York and Massachusetts, the projects themselves support a $25 billion supply chain that includes steel mills, shipbuilders and other manufacturers across 40 states, including Ohio, Louisiana and Texas, according to a report by the Oceantic Network, a nonprofit group that represents the offshore wind industry and its suppliers.
"When a big, multibillion dollar project doesn't move forward, there are so many downstream investments that are affected," said Stephanie Francoeur, a spokeswoman for Oceantic.
The freeze has put Democrats in the unusual position of insisting that money continue to flow to their political rivals.
"It is illegal and we're not going to stand for it," said Representative Kathy Castor, a Florida Democrat. "We're going to fight back to make sure that these dollars get to where they are supposed to go."
Democrats passed the Inflation Reduction Act on a party-line vote in order to fight climate change. But many of the economic benefits ended up flowing to Republican districts, which often have more available land, a skilled manufacturing work force and friendlier permitting processes. The Biden administration also strategically directed grant money to Republican states, hoping to make the law more durable.
Yet Republicans whose districts have projects that are now on the chopping block have refrained from publicly criticizing Mr. Trump's actions.
"There might be some things in there that are worth saving," said Representative Michael Rulli, Republican of Ohio, whose district has $415 million in private investment spurred by federal incentives, including a $230 million auto parts manufacturing facility in Dover that is expected to create 650 new jobs. "That's going to take a little time to figure out."
Some have supported Mr. Trump's spending freeze. Representative Rick Allen, Republican of Georgia, represents a district that has received $1.6 billion in private investments since the law's passage, with one company receiving a $670.6 million loan from the Energy Department for a new facility that makes equipment to reduce the risk of electrical-vehicle fires. Asked about the spending freeze, Mr. Allen claimed without evidence that the Biden administration had doled out money improperly.
"All we want to do is know where the money is going, how the grants were applied for and whether they were applied for lawfully," Mr. Allen said. "Don't you think when you apply for a grant it should be a lawful application?"
On Wednesday, more than 160 solar energy executives met with Republican and Democratic lawmakers to pitch them on the economic benefits of maintaining federal tax credits for solar projects as well as for the factories that produce them.
"We got a very receptive hearing on the Republican side," said Abigail Hopper, the chief executive of the Solar Energy Industries Association, a trade group. "We talked about how electricity demand is growing and we need more energy for energy security and national security. And solar and storage is one of the fastest resources we can develop."
Other companies hope to persuade the administration that their projects fit the theme of "energy dominance," one of Mr. Trump's goals.
Take KORE Power, a battery cell developer. During the Biden administration, the company won a conditional commitment for an $850-million loan from the Energy Department to build a factory in Arizona that could produce lithium-ion cells for batteries on the electric grid. Batteries can help store electricity for times when power demand spikes, sometimes reducing the need to burn natural gas.
But the loan wasn't finalized before Mr. Trump took office, and this month the company canceled plans for the Arizona plant, citing rising construction costs.

Jay Bellows, the chief executive of KORE Power, said that the company would instead try to expand battery production elsewhere in the country at a lower cost by retooling older factories. The company hopes to finalize its loan with the Trump administration, though it will need to renegotiate the terms.
"Even if we're shifting the mind-set away from renewables, we're still going to need energy storage on the grid," Mr. Bellows said. "And we're a U.S. company with U.S. products, right? I think this falls perfectly in line with what this administration is looking to achieve."
Behind the scenes, energy lobbyists said Republican lawmakers were aware of the damage that a halt in clean energy investments could do to their hometowns.
"We just met with more than a dozen key Republican offices, and I can tell you nobody wants to kill jobs," said Bob Keefe, executive director of E2, a nonpartisan group of business leaders and investors. "They don't want to have to go back and face constituents and tell them that the factory I just cut the ribbon on might not be coming. That's going to put them in a hard place."

In the Biden administration, the American environmental movement reached what many of its supporters considered an apex. Congress passed the largest ever federal law to combat climate change. Coal-burning power plants were shutting down. Hundreds of billions of dollars of federal investment in renewable energy, batteries and electric vehicles was beginning to flow.
But in just months, President Trump has attacked much of that work.
The Biden-era climate law, known as the Inflation Reduction Act, is in tatters. The White House is trying to revive coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel, while boosting oil and gas and hindering solar and wind power. And it is weakening or trying to scrap environmental policies and regulations, some dating to 1970.
The abrupt reversal in fortunes has led to a moment of crisis for the environmental community. "The morale is destroyed," said Ramon Cruz, a former president of the Sierra Club. "I won't try to sugar coat it. This is a generational loss."
After a series of stinging defeats and other challenges, some prominent environmental groups are adrift. This week, the Sierra Club's executive director was fired after a rocky tenure in which he oversaw several rounds of layoffs and clashed with employees. Greenpeace is facing a $670 million legal verdict that could put its future at risk. Rewiring America, a nonprofit group that works to electrify buildings, has slashed nearly a third of its staff.
Actions by the Trump administration and the Republican-led Congress have set the environmental movement back years, activists said. Chief among them has been the passage of Mr. Trump's domestic policy bill, which curtailed many of the core elements of the Inflation Reduction Act.
"With one election and one bill, most of the signature climate work that organizations, advocates and movements have been working toward is largely undone," said Ruthy Gourevitch, a policy director at the Climate and Community Institute, a progressive research organization.
The Trump administration's assault on climate policies has pushed some environmental groups to shift their focus away from federal policy. Manish Bapna, president of the Natural Resources Defense Council, said his group was redoubling its efforts in state and federal courts and expanding its advocacy at the state level and internationally.
"We recognize that the United States is much larger than Washington, D.C., and the world is much larger than the United States," Mr. Bapna said.
In the fiscal year that ended in June, the NRDC saw its second highest fund-raising total ever, according to Mark Drajem, a spokesman. (Its best year was 2021.) It is increasing its focus in states like Georgia and Ohio, where it sees opportunities to accelerate solar energy. It is helping to support a Vermont law that would hold fossil fuel companies responsible for climate damage. And the group is expanding its work in India and beginning to work on projects in Africa.
Some hope the environmental movement finds lessons in its recent losses.
Tom Steyer, the billionaire investor who has supported past efforts to mobilize climate voters and pass climate initiatives on state ballots, said the lesson of the 2024 election is that the public wants solutions that have immediate economic effects.
"If we want to win, we need a fundamental recalibration," Mr. Steyer recently wrote on Facebook. "Climate can no longer be a separate cause. It must be the context for making people's lives better. It has to feel like relief. Like opportunity." For example, he wrote, clean energy must mean lower electric bills.
During the first Trump administration, the most successful challenges to the president's attempts to roll back environmental regulations were in the courts. Upon taking office in 2020, President Joseph R. Biden Jr. restored and strengthened many regulations protecting air, water and the climate.
When Mr. Trump was elected to a second term, lawyers at environmental groups anticipated he would dial up the pressure. But the speed and intensity of the fight has exceeded their expectations, said Abigail Dillen, president of Earthjustice, a nonprofit environmental-law group.
As a result, there has been more deliberate coordination with other environmental groups during President Trump's second term, Ms. Dillen said. In June, Earthjustice, the Southern Environmental Law Center, the Public Rights Project and Lawyers for Good Government filed a class-action suit on behalf of 350 groups that lost funding under the Inflation Reduction Act.
Earthjustice has opened 96 legal actions against the Trump administration this year, including lawsuits as well as technical comments on proposed regulatory changes. That's nearly three times the amount it initiated during the first six months of Mr. Trump's first term.
It has had some wins. On Thursday, a federal judge in Washington ordered the Agriculture Department to reinstate grants for farmers and nonprofits that had been terminated. The groups were represented by Earthjustice and two other legal nonprofits, FarmSTAND and Farmers Justice Center.
Still, environmental groups are facing many challenges, including one major lawsuit, internal disagreements and the threat of being targeted by the Trump administration.
Greenpeace lost a lawsuit in March after being sued over allegations it defamed Energy Transfer Partners, the company behind the Dakota Access Pipeline. Kelcy Warren, the company's chairman, was a major donor to Mr. Trump's 2024 campaign.
His company accused Greenpeace of an "unlawful and violent scheme" to incite demonstrations to stop the project. Greenpeace has maintained that it played a minor role promoting peaceful protest and that its actions were protected by the First Amendment.
Greenpeace now faces the prospect of nearly $670 million in damages if it loses on appeal, with its U.S. arm responsible for the vast majority of that amount. That prospect has led Greenpeace to pursue "voluntary separation" agreements with 22 employees, roughly 20 percent of its head count.
But Sushma Raman, the interim executive director of Greenpeace USA, said donations to the organization have remained strong. She said the group was relying on "the power of our mission, the power of the movement, the power of our supporters to keep focusing ahead."
The Sierra Club, one of the nation's oldest environmental groups, has been rocked by a leadership crisis. Ben Jealous, who took over as executive director in 2023, was fired on Monday after a year of tension between Mr. Jealous and local chapters, employees and the organization's union. Mr. Jealous had inherited a substantial budget deficit when he joined the organization, which has an annual revenue of more than $100 million. The group went through several rounds of layoffs, depressing morale.
Mr. Jealous said he planned to fight the termination.
At the same time, the Sierra Club and three other environmental groups are facing a defamation lawsuit by Exxon Mobil in federal court in Texas.
Another setback has been the Trump administration's cancellation of billions of dollars in grants for some environmental organizations. The administration has attempted to claw back $27 billion in grants for clean energy and efficiency projects through the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, which is part of the Inflation Reduction Act.
Rewiring America was slated to receive $490 million of those grants, a significant bump for an organization that reported $621,000 in revenue in 2023. (According to the Windward Fund, a nonprofit organization that supports environmental projects, Rewiring America also received $18,250,000 in grants that year that were not included in public filings because they were awarded under a fiscal sponsorship arrangement with Windward.)
But when Mr. Trump retook the White House, the $490 million was frozen at the administration's request. In May, Rewiring America cut 28 percent of its staff.
Earth's warming could trigger sweeping changes in the natural world that would be hard, if not impossible, to reverse.
Across the environmental movement, there is a widespread sense that money from donors will be harder to come by in the years ahead. Some funders and nonprofits have stepped in to help environmental groups that lost federal support and, in some cases, have lent them staff members.
It's unclear whether funding trends have changed in recent months. Large foundations do not typically change their spending strategies quickly. And nonprofit organizations do not report fund-raising results in real-time.
"It's going to be a hard time to find brand-new climate funders," said Randall Kempner, executive director of the Climate Philanthropy Catalyst Coalition, an umbrella organization of environmental donors.
Breakthrough Energy, the Bill Gates-backed group focused on promoting clean energy, shuttered its D.C. lobbying shop in March, laying off staff and cutting off funding for a number of related groups.
With a White House working to thwart climate action, Mr. Gates made the calculation that his philanthropic dollars would be better spent elsewhere, including helping fill the void left by the dissolution of the U.S. Agency for International Development, according to people familiar with his thinking who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
Mr. Gates is investing directly in climate technology, including a next generation nuclear plant in Wyoming that would generate electricity without emitting greenhouse gases. He declined to comment.
Mr. Steyer, through his investment firm, Galvanize, is also putting his money into clean energy projects and said he invests differently than other climate donors. "We're not funding any suits," he said, referring to legal challenges against the Trump administration. "We are basically trying to create better things that provide tangible benefits now."

Since the beginning of the industrial age, the global economy has required more and more fossil fuels - coal, oil and gas - to power growth.
It is increasingly clear, however, that China's aggressive efforts to sell batteries, solar panels and wind turbines to the world is on course to bring that era to an end, a new report says. The Chinese dominance of clean-energy industries is "creating the conditions for a decline in fossil fuel use," according to a report by Ember, a research group focused on the prospects for clean-energy technologies.
The scale of Chinese production since 2010 has driven the price of these technologies down by 60 to 90 percent, the researchers found. And last year, more than 90 percent of wind and solar projects commissioned worldwide produced power more cheaply than the cheapest available fossil-fuel alternative, they said. That cost advantage might have seemed laughable before China began pumping billions of dollars of subsidies into the sector.
"China is the engine," said Richard Black, the report's editor. "And it is changing the energy landscape not just domestically but in countries across the world."
If Beijing is trying to wrest the future of energy from anyone, it would be the United States, the world's biggest oil and gas producer and exporter. The Trump administration has eliminated almost all federal support for renewable energies and has pressured countries to purchase American fossil fuels as part of trade deals.
The falling cost of renewable energy, though, means that many countries, particularly poorer ones, have a strong incentive to reduce their reliance on fossil fuels.
According to Ember's report, the falling costs of energy produced by Chinese-made wind and solar installations have allowed countries like Mexico, Bangladesh and Malaysia to race past the United States in recent years in terms of using renewably produced electricity (rather than fossil fuels) in everyday activities like heating and cooling buildings or powering vehicles.
Across Africa, solar panel imports from China rose 60 percent in the last 12 months, and 20 African countries imported a record amount over that period, Ember said in a separate study recently.
American companies, who do not make solar panels or wind turbines at anywhere near the scale of Chinese ones, are at a major disadvantage. Chinese companies now supply 80 percent of solar panels and 60 percent of wind turbines worldwide, Ember said.
Beijing is selling clean energy to the world, Washington is pushing oil and gas. Both are driven by national security.
A surge in high quality research and patent applications has cemented China's dominance in the industry.
China has pushed for dominance in renewable energy partly for economic reasons and also to protect its national security by limiting its reliance on oil imports. But the implications for the planet's health could scarcely be greater. Scientific consensus has long been that a sharp decline in fossil fuel use is the surest way to lessen the pace of climate change.
"For too long, emerging economies have faced what seemed like a stark trade-off between growth and sustainability," said Suwit Khunkitti, Thailand's former deputy prime minister. The Ember report "challenges that assumption," he said.
To be sure, some countries would not be keen to rely so heavily on Chinese technology for geopolitical reasons. And few developing countries have the spending capacity to install the kinds of energy transmission and storage capacity that has allowed China to transform its own domestic energy grid so quickly.
When the world's fossil fuel use will peak also comes down to the pace of that change in China itself.
China still burns more coal than the rest of the world combined and emits more climate pollution than the United States and Europe together. The country has not yet seen a decline in coal usage overall, though its total greenhouse gas emissions have reached what looks like a plateau.
But last year, China met 84 percent of its electricity demand growth with solar and wind power, according to the report. That meant it was able to cut fossil fuel use by 2 percent, despite a growing demand for power.
Mr. Black said that decline in fossil fuel use was largely due to burning less coal to produce electricity. He pointed to a number of recent policy directives that have reallocated subsidies and production incentives away from coal and toward solar and wind.
China is still building dozens of new coal-burning power plants, he said, but instead of running constantly like many existing ones, they might be at full capacity only during peaks in energy demand. Meanwhile, the contribution of wind and solar to the grid was quickly growing, he said.
"Coal is increasingly acting like training wheels," said Yuan Jiahai, a professor at North China Electric Power University. "It provides balance and backup while the clean electricity system gains strength and confidence."
China's economy as a whole is increasingly reliant on the clean energy sector.
Investment and production in clean energy last year contributed nearly $2 trillion to China's economy, a figure which the report said was around one-tenth of the country's economy as a whole, or comparable to Australia's entire economy. The clean energy sector grew at a rate three times that of China's economy overall, according to the report.

As President Trump works to blunt the growth of wind and solar power and expand fossil fuel production in the United States, the renewable energy industry is making a new pitch: You need us.
Wind and solar developers are increasingly pointing out that America's demand for electricity is soaring, driven by a boom in data centers, and it's proving difficult to build enough new gas plants to supply all the extra power that the nation needs.
Wind, solar and battery storage are relatively quick and cheap to construct. That could help avert energy shortages and keep prices low, an argument that renewable energy firms are making to policymakers.
"Our message to the administration is, let's be realistic about this," John Ketchum, the chief executive of NextEra Energy, one of the country's largest power producers, said in an interview. "If you take renewables and storage off the table, we're going to force electricity prices to the moon."
These are tough times, politically, for the renewable energy industry. Mr. Trump has been a blistering critic of wind turbines for years and openly promotes fossil fuels like oil and gas, riding into office on a promise to "drill, baby, drill." He has halted federal approvals for wind farms, placed a moratorium on large solar arrays on public lands and frozen billions of dollars in spending for battery factories and electric grid upgrades.
At the same time, Republican leaders in Congress are talking about ending federal subsidies in the form of tax credits for low-carbon electricity, which have been expected to supercharge the growth of wind and solar power. Uncertainty around those credits has paralyzed the renewable energy industry, with companies delaying projects and laying off workers.
The chaos could make it harder for the United States to slash its planet-warming emissions, even as scientists warn the risks from climate change are escalating.
But an environmental argument won't get far with a president who dismisses global warming. So, many wind and solar companies are now casting their industries as essential to achieving U.S. energy abundance.
"The focus is, what do we need to ensure that we have enough energy to retain our dominance in manufacturing, in electrification, in artificial intelligence?" said Sandhya Ganapathy, chief executive of EDP Renewables North America, a leading wind and solar developer.
Over the next 15 years, U.S. electricity demand could increase by up to 50 percent as tech companies build massive data centers for artificial intelligence, factories expand and millions of people plug in electric cars, according to a new study by S & P Global Commodity Insights.
Renewable companies say they are well positioned to help meet that growth in the near future. This year, wind, solar and batteries are projected to make up 93 percent of new electric capacity added to American grids - with the rest coming from power plants that burn natural gas. In many places, building new wind turbines or installing solar panels are often the cheapest ways to generate additional electrons.
But data centers need power around the clock, something wind and solar power alone can't provide. That's why, at the nation's biggest annual gathering of the energy industry in Houston last week, many executives insisted that demand would have to be largely supplied by natural gas plants today and perhaps in the future by advanced nuclear reactors or enhanced geothermal plants, which can generate electricity at all hours.
"The A.I. revolution is coming, it's going to be big, it's going to take a lot of power," said Ryan Lance, chief executive of the oil giant ConocoPhillips. "And gas is going to be right at the forefront of driving that power demand."
Mr. Ketchum of NextEra had a different view. His company already owns a fleet of 19 gas-fired power plants, one of the nation's largest, and plans to build even more gas units as the need for electricity grows. But Mr. Ketchum said that wind, solar and batteries will be just as important for meeting rising demand over the next few years.
A big reason, he explained, is that power companies now have to wait up to five years to order new gas turbines as manufacturers struggle to keep up with global demand. Any new gas projects that aren't already under development are unlikely to come online before 2030, he said. Other nascent technologies like advanced nuclear power are even farther off.
The cost of building new gas power plants has also nearly tripled since the inflation shock of 2022, Mr. Ketchum said, while wind and solar prices have increased only modestly.
Mr. Ketchum added that the intermittent nature of renewables isn't always a problem, since wind and solar are just one component of a larger electric system. Some regions might have gas turbines that don't currently run much at night, so ramping those up and then adding solar and batteries for the daytime could help provide additional round-the-clock power.
"Look, nobody's built more gas-fired generation in the last 20 years than we have, and we agree we're going to need more gas," Mr. Ketchum said. "But there's a time problem and there's a cost problem. So our message is, don't pull away from renewables, because they're the only thing we have as a country that we can build to meet the demand that's here right now and that's really low cost."
Some tech titans echoed that view. Microsoft, which has said it will spend $80 billion on new data centers this year, may need new gas generation in Wisconsin and is paying a hefty sum to reopen the shuttered nuclear plant at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania. But the company still says it wants as much wind and solar power as it can get.
 "It would have been a different conversation a decade ago when wind and solar weren't as cost-competitive, but now they're actually the most cost-competitive option" in places like the Southwest or Great Plains, said Bobby Hollis, Microsoft's vice president of energy.
Jim Robb, chief executive of the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, the nation's grid monitor, has long warned that an overreliance on renewable energy could cause new problems for electric utilities - a wind drought during hot summer months, for example, can raise the risk of blackouts.
But even Mr. Robb agreed that there aren't many other options for rapidly expanding energy supply over the next few years. "To the extent that we're going to unleash abundant energy in North America in the near term, it's going to mostly be wind and solar," Mr. Robb said at a panel on grid reliability in Washington last month.
That message is starting to catch on with some conservative lawmakers. As Republican leaders search for trillions of dollars in offsets to pay for tax cuts, at least 21 G.O.P. House members signed a letter this month urging the preservation of incentives for low-carbon power sources - including wind, solar, hydropower, nuclear and geothermal - that were part of a 2022 climate law signed by former President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
One recent study commissioned by ConservAmerica, a conservative environmental group, estimated that repealing those tax credits could cause U.S. electricity costs to rise by $51 billion per year by 2035, largely because wind and solar additions would decline by 50 percent and become more expensive.
"Common sense tax credits that preserve all-of-the-above options for reliable energy are essential to American energy dominance and keeping costs low," Representative Gabe Evans, Republican of Colorado, said in explaining why he signed the letter. Mr. Evans' district has several factories that make wind-turbine components.
For now, many Trump administration officials remain deeply skeptical of renewables. In Houston last week, Chris Wright, the new U.S. energy secretary, said that wind and solar power weren't nearly as useful as natural gas, and often trigger local opposition.
"Wind has been singled out because it's had a singularly poor record of driving up prices and getting increasing citizen outrage, whether you're a farm or you're in a coastal community," Mr. Wright said.
"Everywhere wind and solar penetration have increased significantly, prices went up," Mr. Wright said. (That isn't always true: While California's electricity rates have jumped as rooftop solar panels have proliferated, Texas has seen its prices decline even as wind and solar now provide one-quarter of the state's power.)
Some renewable energy proponents said they hoped the attacks on wind and solar power would subside once the reality of America's need for more electricity sunk in. They compared it to the early years of the Biden administration, when White House officials blocked new drilling leases only to soften after Russia invaded Ukraine and global oil prices spiked.
"We saw the last administration condemn American oil and gas until gas prices went up - and then they said, um, guys can you please produce more oil and gas," said Jason Grumet, chief executive of the American Clean Power Association, a renewable industry trade group. "We do believe that once the emotion moves through the system and the economics start to come into focus, we'll have a truly all-of-the-above energy policy."

Millions of Americans have watched with dismay as their electricity bills have spiraled upward over the past few years. The rising price of power is squeezing households and businesses, and voter fury over higher costs is jolting elections in New Jersey, Virginia and Georgia.
President Trump, who as a candidate promised to cut electric bills in half within 18 months, has blamed wind and solar power for soaring costs. Democrats say the problem is Mr. Trump's throttling of renewable energy, while others point to the rapid spread of energy-hungry data centers.
But the factors driving electricity rates are often more complicated and depend on where you live, according to a comprehensive new study by researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Not all states are suffering equally. Over the past six years, the average retail price of electricity has risen faster than inflation in 26 states. But rates have stayed flat or even declined in the rest of the country in real terms (that is, they've grown more slowly than overall inflation).
Many states that have seen a major expansion of wind and solar power, like Nevada or North Dakota, have seen prices stay flat or decline, although there are some important exceptions to this rule. California is a leader in renewable energy but has seen some of the largest electricity rate increases in the country, in part because devastating wildfires have imposed steep costs on utilities, which often get passed onto households. In the Northeast, states have struggled with high natural gas prices.
"There are so many different factors that can drive up electricity prices, depending on where you live," said Ryan Hledik, a principal at the Brattle Group, a research firm based in Boston that contributed to the study. "It's a more nuanced story than what you often see in the headlines."
Inflation is part of the story
The simplest factor behind surging power prices is inflation. Since 2021, as a result of post-pandemic disruptions, virtually everything has gotten significantly more expensive: food, cars, lumber, equipment, labor. For the most part, the increase in electricity rates nationwide has been in line with overall inflation, although there has been a noticeable acceleration this year.
National averages can obscure a lot, though, and many states have seen electricity rates rise even faster than inflation, suggesting that there is more to the story.
In California, average retail prices have risen by a staggering 34 percent since 2019 - even after adjusting for inflation. In New Jersey, prices jumped 11 percent in the past year. In states like Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania and West Virginia, prices are rising significantly faster than inflation.
In Redding, Conn., Janice Rotchstein has noticed electricity prices climb over the past three years. She and her partner have been doing what they can to keep bills in check, including line-drying their clothing, installing more efficient air-conditioning and switching to a different retail electricity provider (something that Connecticut allows). All that helped bring down the bill for their nearly 3,000-square-foot house to $309.68 in September, from $421.85 a year earlier.
Even so, electricity remains one of their biggest monthly expenses. "Our bills have continued to be a problem," said Ms. Rotchstein, 81. "What we would just love to know is why."
'It's really poles and wires'
The two biggest factors that influence power prices are the cost of generating electricity at a power plant and then delivering those electrons to homes and business through large regional power lines (known as transmission) and the smaller wires snaking through cities (known as distribution).
"When you look at what's driving electricity bills, it's really poles and wires," said Charles Hua, the founder of PowerLines, a nonprofit organization focused on modernizing utility regulations to cut power bills.
Since 2005, the cost of generating power has declined significantly, partly because the fracking boom has made it much cheaper to extract and burn natural gas, the nation's largest source of electricity.
But over that same period, utilities have nearly tripled the amount they spend annually on the network of poles, wires, substations and transformers that deliver power to customers. Large portions of the electric grid are nearing the end of their 50-year life spans and need replacing. Utilities are also hardening lines and equipment to deal with storms, fires and heat waves, particularly as climate change fuels bigger weather disasters.
This story plays out differently in each state. In California, more than 40 percent of the increase in retail prices since 2019 is attributable to the recent record-breaking wildfires, which have raised insurance costs and forced utilities to replace and upgrade their lines. In Florida, new state laws have required power companies to bury power lines and fortify their electrical substations to prepare for hurricanes.
Various types of grid equipment - such as transformers - have been in short supply globally and have gotten more expensive. Some critics have accused utilities of overspending on power lines, since they can recoup the costs from customers and earn a guaranteed return, although this can be difficult to quantify.
Renewables aren't a big factor (mostly)
In recent years, the United States has seen swift growth in wind and solar power, which together produce 17 percent of the nation's electricity. Energy Secretary Chris Wright has blamed renewable energy for increasing electricity costs because it can't run at all hours and requires fossil fuel backup.
Yet the Lawrence Berkeley study found a more nuanced story. In regions that have great wind and solar resources - such as the gusty Great Plains or sunny Southwest - renewable energy has boomed and retail electricity prices have either flattened or fallen, after adjusting for inflation. Many of these states, like Iowa or South Dakota, don't require anyone to use more renewable power; companies build it because it is often the cheapest option to put additional electrons onto the grid.
But there are exceptions: Several states that aren't especially windy and sunny have required utilities to buy more electricity from large-scale wind or solar farms, such as Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts and New York. These requirements, which are often adopted to lower greenhouse gas emissions, can add a noticeable surcharge to bills.
Many states - including California, Maine and Massachusetts - have also offered incentives for homeowners to install rooftop solar panels. These policies can raise prices for other customers, because solar households pay less to the utility but still rely on it for backup power. That shifts the cost of maintaining the grid to other households, utilities say. (Solar proponents disagree, saying that this argument ignores many benefits of rooftop panels, such as avoided transmission costs.)
Rooftop solar policies accounted for roughly one-quarter of the increase in retail electricity prices in Maine and California since 2019, the Lawrence Berkeley study concluded. More recently, California and some other states have begun paring back their home solar incentive
Yet rising power prices are, in turn, pushing more people toward rooftop solar to lower their bills. Ali Ergun, a 46-year-old hardware engineer, spent around $65,000 this year on solar panels and batteries for his new home in Los Altos Hills, Calif. Solar was not part of Mr. Ergun's plan when he bought the house, but then he saw his electricity bill, which topped $600 his first month there.
"If you're at the whims of utility companies' prices, it's really a bit nerve wracking," he said.
Electricity is expensive in the Northeast because those states rely heavily on imported natural gas and there are a limited number of pipelines into the region, making the fuel costly. (In recent years, New York has blocked new pipelines and closed a nuclear power plant, which deepened the state's reliance on gas.)
That left the Northeast vulnerable when gas prices skyrocketed in 2022, amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine. In Maine and Massachusetts, retail prices shot up by more than one-third as a result of these spikes, which have only lately subsided.
In recent months, many communities have become alarmed by the expansion of massive data centers for artificial intelligence, with some critics warning that these power-hungry facilities will increase electricity costs.
And yet in Virginia, home to one of the world's largest concentrations of data centers, electricity prices have mostly stayed flat over the past six years, adjusting for inflation. If anything, those data centers may have helped suppress prices by allowing utilities to spread the fixed costs of maintaining the grid among a larger set of customers, the Lawrence Berkeley study found.
But the effects of a rapid data center expansion won't always be benign, experts cautioned. A lot depends on whether power companies can keep up with the enormous energy needs of new data centers, and whether tech companies or households bear the cost of any needed grid upgrades.
More ominously, wholesale electric capacity prices have been skyrocketing this year in PJM Interconnection, the large regional grid that supplies Maryland, New Jersey and Pennsylvania and Virginia. Some analyses have blamed those spikes on new data center demand, which are coming as older coal and nuclear plants are retiring and the grid operator has been slow to connect new renewable and gas plants to replace them.
"Part of the problem is that you can often build new data centers faster than you can build new power plants to supply them," said Geoffrey Blanford, a principal technical executive at the Electric Power Research Institute, a nonprofit group that conducts research for the nation's electric utilities. "And that bottleneck can really drive up costs in the short term."
Will prices keep rising?
The average price of electricity has been rising faster than inflation this year and government forecasters expect that will continue next year, especially since natural gas prices are starting to climb upward. Politicians are often struggling for answers.
Trump administration officials say the solution is to drill more natural gas and build more pipelines to get that gas where it's needed.
Yet the administration is also trying to make it more difficult and expensive to build new wind and solar projects, while canceling federal grants for grid upgrades aimed at lowering costs. While it will take time for the full impact of those restrictions to be felt, experts say, they are expected to put upward pressure on electricity prices later this decade.
Some states are exploring ways to blunt price shocks by requiring tech companies to absorb more of the cost of adding new data centers or encouraging those data centers to operate more flexibly so that they limit the strain on the grid. Others are considering technological options that could cut costs, such as deploying more batteries.
The problem is pressing. More than 24 percent of households were unable to pay their energy bills in full in 2024, according to Census Bureau data, up from 20 percent in 2021.
"It's a perfect storm of misery for low-and-middle income households," said Mark Wolfe, executive director of the National Energy Assistance Directors Association.

The Trump administration is snapping up ownership shares of private companies it deems essential to national security. It is an unusual new strategy that has already committed more than $10 billion in taxpayer funds and shows little sign of slowing.
The government's growing portfolio of corporate ownership involves minority stakes, or the option to take them in the future, in at least nine companies involved in steel, minerals, nuclear energy and semiconductors, a New York Times analysis found. The deals were all struck in the past six months, with the bulk made in October and November.
The effort appears mostly driven by national security concerns, particularly a desire for the government to prop up strategic industries and lessen America's reliance on foreign countries like China for key resources. Some officials are hopeful the equity stakes will generate a windfall for taxpayers, but the likelihood of that is unclear. Many of the companies are facing financial headwinds, and some could take years to become profitable.
The unusual government intervention into the private market is fueling some concerns, including the opacity of the process, the potential for favoritism, corruption and market distortions, along with the possible loss of taxpayer funds should the investments fail.
Aaron Bartnick, a fellow at Columbia University and a former Biden White House official, said there were serious questions about whether the government role in private industry would address national security vulnerabilities and deliver a return on taxpayer dollars.
"In the absence of a clearly articulated strategy," he said, the concern was that "this could just devolve to arbitrary deals that favor friends or disfavor foes."
Kush Desai, a White House spokesman, defended the administration's approach.
"If business-as-usual policies worked, America would not be reliant on foreign countries for critical minerals, semiconductors and other products that are key for our national and economic security," he said in a statement. "The administration's targeted equity stakes ensure that taxpayers get a good bargain and that the ball meaningfully moves forward to encourage further investment by the private sector."
Prior administrations have tried to speed the development of sectors like semiconductors and clean energy with grants, loans, tariffs and other policies. But taking equity stakes in companies is incredibly rare. During the 2008 financial crisis, the government took over shares in companies that were faltering or whose collapse posed broader financial risks, including General Motors and Chrysler, along with the giant insurer AIG.
The Trump administration has taken a more aggressive and opportunistic tack. Trump officials have proposed establishing new price floors for minerals to help American firms remain competitive in the face of cheap Chinese imports. They have also discussed taking a cut of certain export revenues, in addition to building a growing portfolio of equity ownership.
The approach contradicts traditional Republican thinking about the power of the free market to identify winners and losers. But officials in both parties have become more supportive of industrial policy and government intervention in recent years. That shift has been brought about by China's dominance of strategic industries, and accelerated by its move to clamp down on exports of minerals needed to make planes, semiconductors, robots and cars this year as part of a trade clash with Washington.
Daniel Kishi, a policy adviser at American Compass, a conservative think tank that supports industrial policy, said that concerns about intervening in markets rested on a "flawed premise." Markets have already been significantly distorted by Chinese subsidies and Beijing's efforts to monopolize global industries, he said, necessitating U.S. government intervention.
"We need an industrial policy of our own to combat the predation of our trading partners," Mr. Kishi said.
Like past administrations, Trump officials have continued taking stakes in companies through the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation, which finances private sector projects around the world. Over the past five years, the development corporation has invested in dozens of international funds and companies.
But the Trump administration has begun using other agencies to take equity stakes as well. Many of the minerals investments are being made through the Defense Department, which has tried to develop sources of rare earths outside of China. Some deals involve the Defense Department's Office of Strategic Capital, which was set up in 2022 and received additional funding through the Trump-backed tax and spending law passed this year to invest in critical minerals, shipbuilding and other strategic sectors.
The Energy Department has leveraged loan programs created in the Biden administration to take equity in mineral companies. The Commerce Department has also used its control of a Biden-era semiconductor fund and investments from foreign countries to begin building a portfolio.
The administration's first significant investment took place in June when it acquired a "golden share" in U.S. Steel in exchange for allowing Japan's Nippon Steel to buy the iconic firm. Administration officials demanded a nonfinancial stake that would give them veto power over certain company decisions, like moving factories offshore. When U.S. Steel planned to close a facility in Granite City, Ill., earlier this year, the government used its influence to intervene.
In July, the Defense Department agreed to take a $400 million stake in MP Materials, a mining company that has struggled to turn profits amid tough price pressures from China.
A month later, the Commerce Department became the largest shareholder of Intel, the beleaguered U.S. chip giant. A public filing from the Office of Government Ethics shows that, shortly after that agreement was made, President Trump personally purchased between $1 million and $5 million of Intel's corporate debt.
The government's equity deals gained speed as China's export curbs intensified, putting America's access to critical minerals and magnets at risk. In October and November, the government made a spate of investments with companies specializing in rare earths.
In October, the Commerce Department also gained the option to take an 8 percent stake in Westinghouse, the nuclear power company. The Commerce Department will help facilitate the construction of nuclear reactors across the United States. If Westinghouse's valuation reaches $30 billion, the government can require it to carry out an initial public offering, with the right to purchase a fifth of the new public company.
Trump officials have speculated about taking stakes in more firms, in industries including mining, semiconductors, technology and defense.
Not all companies have welcomed government investment. Some firms have been reluctant to meet with Trump officials out of fear the government would pressure them to hand over parts of their company, according to industry executives. Intel agreed to do its equity deal with the government after Mr. Trump called for its chief executive to be fired over ties to China.
Officials and analysts have also questioned how much due diligence the Trump administration is performing. While the Biden administration took many months to evaluate targets for grants and loans, and was often criticized for moving slowly, the Trump administration appears to have arranged several of its equity stakes in a matter of weeks.
William A. Reinsch, a senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank, said Biden officials had been "slow and meticulous" in selecting targets, while Mr. Trump seemed to be investing "by whim."
"You know, he meets with somebody, he likes them and so, well, let's do a deal," said Mr. Reinsch, a former Commerce Department official. "You don't get the sense with Trump that there's a strategy to it. You get a sense that it's a series of tactics."
Darrell M. West, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank, who has studied the deals, agreed that "in a number of these cases, there seems to be almost no serious review."
"They don't seem well thought out," Mr. West said, adding that some of the investments involved high-risk areas. "There's no guarantee the government's going to make money, so they're really putting taxpayer money at risk."
But some analysts have praised the Trump administration's sense of urgency, saying that the Biden administration had done extensive research on America's dependence on Chinese rare earths but done little to change it.
After China responded to Mr. Trump's high tariffs by clamping down on its exports of those minerals in April, U.S. officials began calling companies to ask about their capacities, and searching for pots of money to deploy. Private companies, too, began pitching their services to the government, sometimes relying on old friends or former business associates to arrange meetings.
At the Defense Department, a critical minerals task force was set up in the spring with roughly 40 officials and a 90-day deadline to identify new rare earth resources, one former official said. Officials had estimated it would take more than $3 billion in investment to reshore supply chains for rare earth magnets, a critical component for automakers and defense companies.
The Defense Department turned to MP Materials, a company that makes those magnets and had bought a struggling rare earths mine in California. In July, the company announced that the federal government would invest $400 million in exchange for a 15 percent stake, including warrants, which give the government the right to make future stock purchases.
Some Pentagon officials expect the deal to be profitable, but analysts have expressed skepticism. Others have pointed out the long timeline for this plan and other minerals projects, like a mine in Alaska being developed by Trilogy Metals, in which the Defense Department said last month it would take a 10 percent stake.
"You have an entire subset of the U.S. economy that's almost running dry, and if the relief comes in 10 years, that's not necessarily going to have any impact on short-term company needs," said Emily Benson, the head of strategy at Minerva Technology Futures, a consultancy.
In early November, the government announced its latest equity deal, with Vulcan Elements, a North Carolina-based start-up making rare earth magnets. The company offered the government equity and warrants in return for $50 million from the Commerce Department and $620 million from the Defense Department.
Vulcan Elements plans to expand its capacity to 10,000 metric tons in the next few years, up from 10 tons currently. The company has received investment from several venture funds, including 1789 Capital, where the president's son, Donald Trump Jr., is a partner.
In an interview, John Maslin, the chief executive of Vulcan Elements, said the company had received no political favoritism, and that the partnership would help reduce a dependency on China that could prevent the United States from making key goods like cars, phones and robots.
"We're making sure that we don't have to ask China permission on whether or not we're allowed to build or buy defense applications or data centers for our A.I. race," Mr. Maslin said. "This truly is about making sure that we have the redundancy and the resiliency in the United States to control our destiny."
"This needs a whole-of-industry and a whole-of-government approach, working together to solve this problem," he added.

The artificial intelligence boom has turbocharged demand for electricity, and everyone who is anyone in the U.S. energy industry wants a piece of the action.
The latest entrant is Chevron, the country's second-largest oil and gas company, which sees opportunity in building natural gas-fueled power plants that will feed energy directly to data centers.
Chevron is working with Engine No. 1, a San Francisco-based investment firm best known for waging a successful proxy battle against Exxon Mobil in 2021. The companies say they have ordered critical equipment, scouted potential sites and can have their first plant online within three years.
"It's a chance for us to help meet the moment and address this growing need for reliable and affordable power," Mike Wirth, Chevron's chief executive, said in an interview.
Chevron's announcement is the latest example of just how much the promise of A.I. - a voracious electricity consumer - is reshaping the economy. Oil producers are recalibrating their strategies and leaning into power generation, a business that many of them had previously sworn off because it was much less profitable than drilling and processing oil and gas. Just last month, Exxon said that it, too, wanted to get into the business of selling electricity to data centers.
But in a reminder that the prospects for A.I. data centers and growing electricity demand are highly uncertain, technology and energy stocks tumbled on Monday. Investors were unnerved by the stunning advances in A.I. made by an unfamiliar Chinese start-up, DeepSeek, that said it had made its gains using a modest number of computer chips that consumed relatively little energy. Shares of chip-maker Nvidia tumbled 17 percent and the stock of Constellation Energy, a large power producer, closed down more than 20 percent.
"There's always the potential for markets to surprise you," Mr. Wirth said. But he added that being early to market and keeping its costs low would protect Chevron against the possibility that power demand growth falls short of current expectations.
His company is hardly alone.
Many power producers are bulking up, and many are investing in natural gas generating capacity specifically. Constellation, which has a large fleet of nuclear power plants, agreed this month to buy rival Calpine, which owns many natural gas plants, for $16.4 billion. And last week, NextEra Energy said it was planning to build more gas-fueled power plants.
Expectations for how much and how quickly U.S. electricity demand will rise vary widely. What's clear is that data centers are likely to consume a lot more of the country's power than they do today. A recent study by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory estimated that the facilities are poised to use up to 12 percent of U.S. electricity in 2028, up from 4.4 percent in 2023.
Chevron and Engine No. 1 said they have reserved seven gas turbines from GE Vernova, one of the companies created by the breakup of General Electric. The equipment is set to be delivered beginning in 2026. Chevron and Engine No. 1, which did not say how much they plan to spend, have been in talks with prospective customers and expect to build up to four gigawatts of gas-generating capacity.
Natural gas-fired power plants cost around $2 billion per gigawatt, Morgan Stanley recently estimated.
In this case, the plants would be located alongside the data centers they power. Like Exxon, the partners expect their facilities would not be connected to the electric grid to start, so the plants can get up and running more quickly. It can take years for grid managers to approve connection requests.
Eventually though, they aim to secure grid hookups, said Chris James, Engine No. 1's chief investment officer. "A grid interconnect allows us to be able to supply power back to the grid when it needs it," he said.
Technology giants like Microsoft and Google have set targets to get all of their energy from sources that do not contribute to climate change after taking into account carbon capture and other technologies. But some tech companies now say that they will be hard-pressed to get all the power they need in the next few years without relying on natural gas, which produces carbon dioxide when it is burned. The greenhouse gas is the leading cause of climate change.
"It's this valley between now and then that leaves a lot of people scratching their heads and realizing that if you don't lean on gas, the answer might be worse," said Jesse Noffsinger, a partner at the consulting firm McKinsey & Company.
Chevron and Engine No. 1 said their plants could be built in several regions. They have ruled out the East Coast because of infrastructure constraints and feedback from potential customers.
The companies also looked for sites  able to accommodate the capturing and sequestering carbon dioxide emissions, said Mr. James.
The companies don't plan to incorporate that technology or renewable energy at the outset, however.
"We're very confident that over time as the policy environment clarifies itself, as we make good progress on technology development, that some of these other alternatives will be part of it," Mr. Wirth said.

Wind and solar projects are the fastest growing new source of electricity in the United States and account for nearly two-thirds of new electric capacity expected to come online this year. For utilities and tech companies, adding solar, wind and batteries has often been one of the easiest ways to help meet soaring electricity demand. Other technologies like new nuclear reactors can take much longer to build, and there is currently a multiyear backlog for new natural gas turbines.
The repeal of federal subsidies alone could cause wind and solar installations to plummet by as much as 72 percent over the next decade, according to the Rhodium Group, a research firm. The new tax could depress deployment even further by raising costs an additional 10 to 20 percent, the group estimated.

King Charles III invoked his forebear George III during President Trump's state visit to Britain this week, saying his 18th-century ancestor did not "spare his words when he spoke of the revolutionary leaders" in the colonies.
Charles almost certainly spared Mr. Trump a few of his words, as likely did Prime Minister Keir Starmer. On a state visit that was more about flattering the president than forging policy breakthroughs, Charles might instead have cited George's line to the Americans from the musical "Hamilton": "You'll be back."
For Mr. Trump, Britain was an enchanting diversion from a United States convulsed in the toxic aftermath of Charlie Kirk's shooting death. It offered an imperial-minded president a form of validation, putting him in the company of a king with whom Mr. Trump identifies, in a country with which he has ancestral ties.
Mr. Trump, of course, was on a return state visit to Britain, a privilege so singular that he joked that it better not happen again. The two days of pageantry, which unspooled from gilded carriages and marching Grenadiers to aerobatic jets and flag-draped parachutists, plainly left Mr. Trump gratified.
What was less clear after he departed Mr. Starmer's country residence, Chequers, for Washington on Thursday was whether this precedent-shattering display of hospitality would translate into any lasting gains for Britain.
Mr. Trump didn't appear to soften the terms of a trade deal Britain negotiated with the United States. Nor did he promise to exert any fresh pressure on the two security issues that most concern Britain: Russia's war on Ukraine and Israel's grinding military campaign in Gaza. Mr. Trump said he disagreed with Mr. Starmer about recognizing a Palestinian state, but he did so without rancor.
 "We could still get into a lot of trouble with Trump, despite having done all this," said Kim Darroch, who served as Britain's ambassador to Washington during Mr. Trump's first term. "But if we don't, I'm confident ministers will say it was worth the price. That's just the reality of being a medium-size country on the global stage."
Mr. Starmer played up an advanced technology partnership with the United States as the marquee business dividend of the visit. Speaking to an audience of Silicon Valley billionaires and Wall Street financiers, he vowed the deal would unlock "life-changing investments across the United Kingdom."
Mr. Trump was more offhand. He joked that if it turned out to be a bad deal for the United States, he would blame Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent, who told him to sign it. He claimed not to know Peter Mandelson, Britain's most recent ambassador to Washington, who had been instrumental in negotiating the deal on the British side, even though the two met last week in the Oval Office.
That answer came in response to what could have been the most awkward moment of a news conference with Mr. Trump and Mr. Starmer.
The president was asked whether he had sympathy for Mr. Mandelson, whom Mr. Starmer fired last week after new revelations about the depth of his friendship with Jeffrey Epstein, the financier and sex offender. Mr. Trump regularly deflects questions about his long-ago ties to Mr. Epstein, with whom he was friendly for at least 15 years, by his own account.
"I think maybe the prime minister would be better speaking of that; it was a choice that he made," Mr. Trump said, turning to Mr. Starmer with a faint smile. "What is your answer to that?"I
n a clipped tone, Mr. Starmer said he had acted after "some information came to light last week, which wasn't available when he was appointed."
Given the potential for worse, it was a relatively anodyne exchange. And it indicated that Mr. Trump was eager not to embarrass his host, with whom he has developed a warm relationship, despite their different politics.
Still, Mr. Trump did little to suggest that the relationship between the United States and Britain was a two-way street. At the meeting with business leaders, he focused on the inroads he was making in the British market on behalf of American farmers. British officials failed to negotiate reductions in tariffs on steel exports or Scotch whisky, which were among their goals for the visit.
"We're really the ones who can do tariffs," Mr. Trump said, as Mr. Starmer looked on impassively. "No one else can do them."
Even the technology partnership was not all it was cracked up to be, according to some critics. Nick Clegg, a former Liberal Democratic deputy prime minister who later worked as a lobbyist for the American tech giant Meta, said the deal amounted to "sloppy seconds" from Silicon Valley.
"It's all one-way traffic," Mr. Clegg said in a speech Wednesday to the Royal Television Society in Cambridge. "These companies need those infrastructure resources anyway. They're building data centers all over the world. Maybe they were pushed a bit forward just to meet the timetable with this week's state visit."
British diplomats said that a trans-Atlantic agreement on civil nuclear technology was valuable because it would give Britain an edge in the growing market for so-called small modular reactors. As a carbon-free source of electricity for homes and factories, these compact plants could be deployed to help Britain achieve ambitious goals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
On security issues, Mr. Trump made no new commitments of support to a "coalition of the willing" that Mr. Starmer and other European leaders are assembling to secure Ukraine in the event of a peace settlement with Russia. Some analysts said a breakthrough on this was unlikely during a state visit.
Mr. Starmer and the king also both had to tolerate being bystanders in the round-the-clock drama that is Mr. Trump's presidency. After the banquet on Wednesday, the president retired to his room in Windsor Castle, only to post on social media that the suspension of the talk-show host Jimmy Kimmel, after on-air comments about the right's reaction to the killing of Mr. Kirk, was "great news for America."
With Mr. Starmer, a Labour prime minister, standing next to him on Thursday, Mr. Trump delivered repeated vitriolic attacks on his Democratic predecessor, President Joseph R. Biden Jr. He also suggested that Mr. Starmer consider deploying troops to stop the flow of migrants into Britain.
Mr. Starmer, like the king, did not flinch. He referred repeatedly to Mr. Trump as his friend. The flattery and cajolery are apparently worth the price, even if it draws japes in Britain, so long as it keeps Mr. Trump on the right side.
So great were the lengths to which the British went, the president could have turned George III's smug lyrics from "Hamilton" back on his hosts.
"You'll be back, soon, you'll see," he sang. "You'll remember you belong to me."
Mark Landler is the London bureau chief of The Times, covering the United Kingdom, as well as American foreign policy in Eu

The Senate confirmed Chris Wright to lead the U.S. Department of Energy on Monday, putting the former oil executive in a key position to help shape President Trump's energy policies.
Mr. Wright, the founder and chief executive of Liberty Energy, a fracking firm, was confirmed by a vote of 59 to 38, with support from all Republicans present and a smaller number of Democrats. He would be the 17th secretary of energy, a position that was created in 1977.
At his confirmation hearing, Mr. Wright said his top priority was to "unleash" domestic energy production, including liquefied natural gas and nuclear power. He also told Democrats that he believed climate change was a "global challenge that we need to solve" and that he would support the development of renewable energy like wind and solar power.
At the same time, Mr. Wright said he would "work tirelessly" to support Mr. Trump's "bold" energy agenda. The president has frequently dismissed climate change as a hoax, disparaged wind and solar power and said he wants to expand the use of oil, gas and coal, the burning of which is driving climate change.
The Energy Department plays a central role in developing new energy technologies. The agency oversees a network of 17 national laboratories that conduct cutting-edge research as well as a powerful loan office that has backed dozens of low-carbon energy projects, including battery factories in Ohio and Tennessee and two giant nuclear reactors in Georgia.
Mr. Wright would also oversee approvals of liquefied gas export terminals, which the Biden administration tried to slow, angering industry groups. Mr. Trump has already ordered the Energy Department to restart reviews of proposed export facilities.
The Energy Department is a sprawling agency. About 80 percent of the department's $52 billion annual budget goes toward maintaining the nation's nuclear arsenal, cleaning up environmental messes from the Cold War and conducting research in areas like high-energy physics.
Under the Biden administration, the department aggressively supported new clean energy technologies such as advanced nuclear power, enhanced geothermal energy, green hydrogen fuels, next-generation batteries and more. Backed by new funding from Congress, it issued tens of billions in loans and grants to everything from firms making low-carbon cement to power companies building new transmission lines.
At his confirmation hearing, Mr. Wright mostly declined to go into details about how he would run the department.
Some conservative groups have urged Mr. Wright to reorient or even shutter the agency's Loan Programs Office, which was given roughly $400 billion in loan authority by Congress to bring promising energy technologies to market. Under the Biden administration, the office finalized more than $60.6 billion in loans and loan guarantees to companies that were mining lithium, restarting a shuttered nuclear plant, converting wind and solar power into hydrogen fuels and more. It also issued $47 billion in conditional loans that have not been finalized.
As of Jan. 17, there were still 160 companies seeking more than $200 billion in loans and loan guarantees. But the loan office's work has largely been paused since Mr. Trump took office, and it is unclear what will happen to those applications.
Most major environmental groups and many Democrats opposed Mr. Wright's confirmation, saying that he downplayed the risks of a warming planet. In a social media post in 2023, Mr. Wright wrote, "There is no climate crisis, and we're not in the midst of an energy transition, either." On a podcast last year, he said that climate change would have "a slow-moving, modest impact two or three generations from now."
On podcasts and in speeches, Mr. Wright has frequently made a moral case for fossil fuels, arguing that the world's poorest people need access to oil, gas and coal to enjoy the benefits of modern life that rich nations take for granted.
Still, some Senate Democrats joined Republicans in voting to approve Mr. Wright's nomination. They included Ruben Gallego of Arizona, Michael Bennet and John Hickenlooper of Colorado, Maggie Hassan and Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, Ben Ray Luján and Martin Heinrich of New Mexico, as well as Angus King, an independent from Maine who normally caucuses with Democrats.
"While I do not agree with Mr. Wright on a number of issues, he has committed to working with us in good faith" on issues like investing in national labs and building out high-voltage power lines, Mr. Heinrich said last month.
Mr. Wright graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and did graduate work on solar energy at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1992, he founded Pinnacle Technologies, which created software to measure the motion of fluid beneath the Earth's surface. The software helped bring about a commercial shale-gas revolution.
Mr. Wright started Liberty Energy in 2011, and the company has worked with others on geothermal energy and small, modular nuclear reactors.
Mr. Wright holds 2.6 million shares in the company, which were worth roughly $47 million based on Monday's closing stock price. In a written statement to the Senate he promised to step down from Liberty Energy and divest his holdings within 90 days after being confirmed. According to his ethics agreement, he is scheduled to get paid his last bonus from the company in March.

The Food and Drug Administration has expanded its recall of a limited number of bags of frozen shrimp, warning the public not to eat, sell or serve certain frozen shrimp from an Indonesian supplier.
Earlier this week, Walmart said it removed Great Value-brand imported frozen shrimp from store shelves in 13 states after the F.D.A. found contamination from a radioactive isotope in shipping containers and in one sample. On Thursday, the F.D.A. said that Southwind Foods, based in California, had also recalled some of its frozen shrimp because of possible contamination.
Barbara Kowalcyk, director of the Institute for Food Safety and Nutrition Security at George Washington University, said the risk to the public was very low.
"I think they're doing the recall as a precautionary approach," she said in an interview on Wednesday.
Certain packages of Great Value-brand frozen raw shrimp sold at Walmart stores in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, Mississippi, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas and West Virginia were recalled.
In addition, Southwind Foods recalled shrimp that was distributed between July 17 and Aug. 8 to retailers, distributors and wholesalers in Alabama, Arizona, California, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia, and Washington state.
The F.D.A. said that U.S. Customs and Border Protection had reported the detection of cesium-137 in shipping containers at U.S. ports in Los Angeles, Houston, Miami and Savannah, Ga. The agency said it collected multiple samples and confirmed the presence of cesium-137 in one sample of breaded shrimp. The agency said that none of the containers or products that tested positive were allowed into the country.
The shrimp was processed by PT. Bahari Makmur Sejati, an Indonesian supplier also known as BMS Foods, according to the F.D.A. All of the packages affected by the recall have a "best by" date of March 15, 2027. No illnesses have been reported to date, the F.D.A. said Thursday. The supplier did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Walmart said in a statement on Wednesday that the health of its customers was a top priority. "We are working with the supplier to investigate."
Cesium-137, a synthetic radioactive isotope of cesium, is a product of nuclear fission and can be found in trace amounts in soil, food and air.
The F.D.A. said that the level of cesium-137 detected in the breaded shrimp sample fell below the threshold where protective measures should be considered. But it said the isotope could be "a potential health concern" for anyone exposed to it over an extended period when combined with "radiation that exists in the environment and from other sources such as medical procedures."
Longer-term, repeated, low-dose exposure, for instance through the consumption of contaminated food or water, can lead to an elevated cancer risk, the agency said.
 "If you were eating shrimp all the time, like on a daily basis, then there might be more concern," Dr. Kowalcyk, of George Washington University, said. "But a sporadic exposure is probably not as concerning, mainly because we're all exposed at some level."
Americans eat nearly six pounds of shrimp on average per year. The crustaceans are a good source of protein, but shrimp, especially the cheaper varieties, can be treated with chemicals such as sodium tripolyphosphate and sodium bisulfite. The F.D.A. considers those chemicals safe in low doses, though about 1 percent of the U.S. population has a sensitivity to sulfites.

The toxic legacy of this rare earth industry illustrates the complex trade-offs made to power carbon-free energy. The so-called heavy rare earth elements mined in Myanmar are used in electric vehicles, wind turbines and nuclear power plants. They are not actually that rare but are usually dispersed in other ores, and extracting them can be extraordinarily destructive to the environment. To procure one ton of heavy rare earths, such as terbium or dysprosium, tens of thousands of tons of earth must be moved and treated, often producing a mountain of contaminated waste.
In this remote corner of Southeast Asia, the mining boom is a byproduct of a fierce civil war in Myanmar, where the ruling military's decades of repression have catalyzed ethnic armed groups and pro-democracy forces to fight back. To fill their war chests, the military and some of the militias rely on a panoply of illegal businesses, from synthetic drugs and opium to wildlife poaching to online scams. Many of these enterprises are directed by Chinese crime syndicates, which have expanded into Southeast Asia after crackdowns at home.
This extraction occurs in remote reaches of Myanmar, where there are no environmental protections, no worker safety laws, no vows of corporate social responsibility. Since the coup, thousands of acres of forest have been razed in northern Myanmar's Kachin and Shan states in the quest for rare earths. Hillsides have been reduced to rubble, with toxic byproducts of the mining seeping into the landscape before entering rivers and groundwater. Further refining processes can also release harmful radioactive material and hazardous dust into the environment.
More than a million people living in these riverine ecosystems in Thailand are already affected by the pollution, researchers say. While Thailand is yet to comprehensively test the waters, scientists fear that these toxins could also flow downstream to the cities of mainland Southeast Asia. (The toll in Myanmar is devastating, witnesses say, but largely unrecorded because of the civil war.)

Ms. Murkowski may have come away with the biggest pot of benefits narrowly targeted to her state. Alaska-specific provisions include the tax deduction for fisheries' business meals, a new tax exemption to fishermen from villages in western Alaska and a measure that would allow certain Alaskan whaling captains to deduct more of their expenses.
She also won a carve-out exempting Alaska from a new cost-sharing requirement that would force states for the first time to pick up the costs of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program if they report a certain error rate.
In the Senate, Republican leaders included a measure that would revive and significantly expand a law for compensating victims of government-caused nuclear contamination who developed cancer and other serious illnesses. That was a measure long championed by Senator Josh Hawley, Republican of Missouri, who for weeks before the bill's passage had said he was hesitant to support the legislation because of the impact it would have on Medicaid. He ultimately voted for it despite deriding the Medicaid cuts as "bad"; he has already introduced legislation to reverse them.
The expansion of the law meant that for the first time residents in Missouri, Tennessee, Kentucky and Alaska - sites where workers processed uranium for the nation's nuclear program - who were exposed to nuclear contamination will be eligible for benefits.
G.O.P. senators also specifically targeted the airport authority that operates the Washington area's two major airports, Dulles and Ronald Reagan National, inserting a provision that would force the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority to pay the federal government twice as much as it currently does to lease the land the airports are on.
And even though the airport authority just signed a lease agreement through 2100, the legislation would override that, forcing the authority to renegotiate the lease every decade.

Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the minority leader, said Thursday that the passage of President Trump's domestic policy agenda had boosted Democrats' hopes of claiming the Senate majority in the 2026 midterm elections, handing them a winning economic message as they seek to contest an expanded map of states around the country.
"The three issues we're going to most campaign on: costs, jobs, and health care," Mr. Schumer said in an interview  at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee headquarters, across the street from the Capitol. "Those affect average people and every state."
He argued that the sweeping law to extend tax cuts and slash social safety net programs would hurt not just those who rely on Medicaid - which will be cut by nearly $1 trillion - but by a broad swath of Americans.  
"It's going to raise insurance costs even if you don't have Medicaid," he said. "Your electricity costs will go up by 10 percent. Even not poor people, it goes across the board. And it's hitting at the same time that your costs are going up because of tariffs."
As they search for ways to connect with voters ahead of the midterm elections, House and Senate Democrats have been poring over polling and research that shows their likely best bet is focusing on the Republicans' cuts to health care and food assistance programs for working people in order to help pay for tax cuts that provide the biggest benefits to the wealthy.
A recent poll conducted by Blue Rose Research on behalf of the Senate Majority PAC, an outside group aligned with Democrats, found that 50 percent of voters said they were less likely to support their representative in the upcoming election if he or she had voted for the bill. That number included 49 percent of swing voters and 17 percent of voters who supported Mr. Trump in the 2024 election.
"What Republicans have forgotten is that the trifecta they have right now is a result of gains they have made with lower-income individuals, many of the same people who are Medicaid recipients," said Jesse Stinebring, chief executive of Blue Rose Research. "Their coalition has become much more working-class, and they are still operating under this model where these types of actions wouldn't have political consequences for them - and they absolutely will have consequences for them."
Mr. Schumer, who has been quietly working to recruit Democratic Senate candidates in both battleground and traditionally Republican-leaning states, said on Thursday that he had been speaking with prospects who might not have considered running back in January but were now suddenly enthusiastic about mounting Senate campaigns. He would not share the names of anyone on his wish list.
"I'm not going to talk about specific states at this point," Mr. Schumer said, "but many states you wouldn't think are in play are in play - our map has expanded."
The reality of the map is daunting: All but two of the 22 Republican seats in play in the midterms are in states that Mr. Trump carried by at least 10 percentage points in 2024.
In trying to sell a deeply unpopular bill, some Republicans have been highlighting small wins on the margins. In Missouri, Senator Josh Hawley held an event this week highlighting his successful fight for an expanded fund for victims of nuclear waste, a longtime personal project of his that was tucked into the policy bill after he roundly condemned the Medicaid cuts that were also included. He ultimately voted for the measure, though he conceded that the Medicaid cuts were "bad" and would harm people.
In Wisconsin, Representative Derrick Van Orden has been claiming credit for a $50 billion rural hospital fund that Senate Republicans added to the bill to blunt the impact of the Medicaid cuts. However, many lawmakers and analysts have argued that the fund will do little to reduce the impact of nearly $1 trillion in lost funding.
"They're clinging to straws because the rest is so bad, and they haven't offered real things to large amounts of people," Mr. Schumer said.
A spokesman for the Republicans' Senate campaign arm, Nick Puglia, said in a statement: "Chuck Schumer should remember why his party does not control the current majority in the U.S. Senate and won't in 2027."
Mr. Schumer dismissed the notion that voters would not feel the bulk of the pain from enactment of the law until after the midterms, though its cuts to Medicaid, nutrition assistance and other safety net programs are not set to be implemented until after 2026. New tax reductions would occur almost immediately.
"It you're a hospital and you know you're going to lose everything on Jan. 1, 2027, you've got to prepare a year in advance, you've got to start cutting now," he said.
The Democrats' Senate campaign arm followed up on Mr. Schumer's comments with a list of projects in battleground states that were impacted just days after the bill was signed into law at the White House. And many Democrats have said that the effects of the bill will be bad now and worse later, creating an ongoing political opportunity for Democrats to remind voters why they are suffering and whom to blame.
In North Carolina, for example, plans to reopen a rural hospital are suddenly in jeopardy because of the loss of Medicaid funding. Two planned solar projects in Maine appear to be on hold because of the elimination of renewable energy tax credits. And in Texas, a local food bank said it was cutting its weekly services in half because of limited federal resources.

Climate advocates, Democrats, and even some House Republicans who last month had supported a tax package that gutted federal support for clean energy were hoping the Senate would make fixes to protect energy manufacturing and jobs.
But on Monday, Senate Republicans disappointed them, proposing to quickly end most tax breaks for wind and solar power, electric vehicles and other clean energy.
Draft legislation released by the Senate Finance Committee would terminate or scale back most of the major tax incentives for clean energy contained in the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, the Biden administration's signature climate law.
The plan would eliminate within six months a $7,500 consumer tax credit for purchases of electric vehicles as well as home energy rebates for things like electric heat pumps and induction stoves. A tax credit for homeowners who install solar panels on rooftops would end within 180 days. A subsidy for making hydrogen fuels would expire this year.
Federal tax credits for wind and solar power, which have been in place for decades but were made more lucrative under the Inflation Reduction Act, would be rapidly phased out. Wind and solar companies could qualify for the full tax break only if they began construction in the next six months. They would receive 60 percent of the tax break if they began construction in 2026, and 20 percent of the tax credit if they began construction in 2027. Projects built after that would get nothing.
That's a slightly longer runway for renewable energy than is in the House version of the bill, which would have ended those tax breaks almost immediately.
But the phaseout is quicker than many clean-energy supporters had hoped for, and some analysts had warned that pulling support for wind and solar power could cause electricity prices to rise in the coming years.
Senator Mike Crapo, Republican of Idaho and the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said in a statement that the tax package "powers the economy" by permanently extending tax cuts for individuals and businesses.
"The legislation also achieves significant savings by slashing Green New Deal spending and targeting waste, fraud and abuse in spending programs while preserving and protecting them for the most vulnerable," he said.
In the most notable change from the House version, the Senate bill would preserve tax credits for companies that build nuclear reactors, geothermal plants, hydropower dams or battery storage through 2033.
Energy Secretary Chris Wright and other business groups had urged Congress to keep credits for so-called baseload clean electricity sources that are still earlier in development but can operate at all hours, unlike wind and solar power.
Like the House bill, the Senate draft would also make solar leasing companies ineligible for federal tax credits, a change that analysts say could cause the rooftop solar market to sharply decline.
"This is worse than I thought it would be," said Sam Ricketts, co-founder of S2 Strategies, a clean-energy consulting group. "I was expecting senators who had purportedly supported the clean energy industry to step forward and make a mark here and improve the bill in a material sense. They have not done that."
Jason Grumet, the chief executive of America's Clean Power, which represents renewable energy producers, said the Senate bill "would increase household electricity bills and threaten hundreds of thousands of jobs across the country."
"The most immediate impact will be felt by consumers and companies facing increased energy bills," Mr. Grumet said. He predicted that "good paying jobs, technology innovation, and AI data centers will be driven overseas."
When Democrats passed the I.R.A. in 2022, no Republicans voted for it. But nearly 80 percent of the more than $841 billion in announced clean energy investments that followed the law have flowed to Republican districts, from wind farms in Wyoming to battery factories in Georgia.
Such benefits created some tension among Republicans, between fiscal conservatives who want to erase the tax credits and moderates who want to protect the factories and jobs spurred by the credits.
Soon after the House approved its version of the tax package, which gutted clean energy provisions, 13 House Republicans lobbied the Senate to preserve some of the clean energy incentives they had voted to erase.
Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the minority leader, was also making behind-the-scenes pitches to his Republican counterparts to protect the tax credits.
The efforts appear to have led to only minor changes.
Democrats and clean energy groups called the Senate draft a disaster, arguing that the plan would destroy jobs and manufacturing across the United States and drive up energy bills.
The package also would make it virtually impossible for the United States to meet the goal it once had of slashing emissions by at least 50 percent below 2005 levels by 2030, to try to slow global warming.
The Biden administration had hoped to achieve that goal by encouraging clean energy with tax credits and by aggressively cutting pollution from power plants and automobiles. Even then, the country was struggling to meet its climate goals.
But the Trump administration, which favors fossil fuels, is dismantling all those efforts.
"This bill would endanger hundreds of thousands of clean energy jobs and take food out of the mouths of millions of children," Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the leading Democrat on the finance committee, said.
Ari Matusiak, the chief executive of Rewiring America, a nonprofit group founded in 2020 that is dedicated to electrifying homes and businesses, called the package a "profound mistake." He said in 2023 that more than 3.4 million homes in the U.S. used the energy efficiency home improvement credit along with the residential clean energy credit to make upgrades.
Jackie Wong, senior vice president for climate and energy at the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group, called the package "a 20-pound sledgehammer swung at clean energy."
She said the version as written "would mean higher energy prices, lost manufacturing jobs, shuttered factories, and a worsening climate crisis."
Others praised the package.
Pat Vincent-Collawn, the president of the Edison Electric Institute, a utility trade association, said in a statement that the Senate created "more reasonable timelines" for phasing out energy tax credits than the House did.
Like the House bill, the Senate text also adds new restrictions on tax breaks for both power plants and factories that build solar panels, batteries or other low-carbon technologies by disqualifying companies that use components from China.
Many companies had complained that the House language was far too restrictive, since China dominates global supply chains, and urged modifications. While the Senate version makes numerous adjustments, some industry groups said they were still reviewing the new language to see if it was workable.
Ms. Vincent-Collawn praised the Senate modification, calling it "a step in the right direction," but suggested there was more work to be done.
"We look forward to continuing to work with lawmakers to ensure the final package incorporates practical, pro-growth policies that support our shared goals of strengthening America's energy security and keeping customer bills as low as possible," she said.
But some fiscal conservatives in the House have strongly opposed even the most modest extension of tax credits for wind and solar, and it remains unclear where Congress will ultimately land.

The Trump administration has revived talks with Saudi officials over a deal that would give Saudi Arabia access to U.S. nuclear technology and potentially allow it to enrich uranium, Energy Secretary Chris Wright said on Sunday.
The deal - which the Biden administration had pursued as part of a broader agreement for Saudi Arabia to establish ties with Israel - would enable the kingdom to develop a "commercial nuclear power industry," Mr. Wright told journalists in Riyadh. He added that he expected to see "meaningful developments" this year.
"We've not reached the details on an agreement, but it certainly looks like there is a pathway to do that," he said. "The issue is control of sensitive technology. Are there solutions to that that involve enrichment here in Saudi Arabia? Yes."
Asked whether the talks were tied to Saudi Arabia's agreeing to "normalize" diplomatic relations with Israel, Mr. Wright said only that "relationships are always package deals" and that there were many potential areas of cooperation between the two countries.
For years, Saudi Arabia has pressed the United States to help it develop a nuclear energy program, as Saudi officials look beyond oil to provide energy and diversify the economy. 
The deal gained momentum under the Biden administration when Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, the kingdom's de facto ruler, offered to establish diplomatic relations with Israel in exchange for cooperation on building nuclear reactors and other concessions from the United States, including security guarantees. Those talks faltered after the Israel-Hamas war in Gaza upended the Middle East, deepening support for the Palestinians and enmity toward Israel across the region, including in Saudi Arabia.
Over the years, frustrated Saudi officials had also explored obtaining nuclear technology from other countries, including China and Russia.
"It's critical that it becomes the United States as the partner," Mr. Wright said on Sunday. "The fact that may have been in doubt is probably indicative of unproductive relationships between the United States and Saudi Arabia in the last several years."
The deal faces several obstacles. The United States requires countries to meet high standards of nonproliferation before cooperating on a nuclear program, including in some cases banning uranium enrichment and fuel reprocessing in their territory. The pact must be reviewed by Congress, which can block it.
In the past, members of Congress on both sides of the aisle have expressed opposition to an agreement, including Marco Rubio, who is now secretary of state.
At the same time it is negotiating with Riyadh, the Trump administration has restarted nuclear talks with Iran in an effort to contain Tehran's growing nuclear program, after the United States withdrew from a multilateral 2015 agreement in the first Trump presidency.
Prince Mohammed has also pushed for a deal that would allow domestic uranium enrichment. He believes that the kingdom has vast uranium resources, although so far, exploration has yielded "severely uneconomic" deposits, according to a report by the intergovernmental Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Supporters of the deal argue that if the United States does not get involved, Saudi Arabia will obtain nuclear technology from a country that requires fewer safeguards.
Trump administration officials visiting Riyadh had discussions with Saudi officials about energy, mining, critical minerals and climate change, Mr. Wright said. A broader agreement on increasing cooperation between the two countries to develop energy resources will be signed "at a later date," he said.
American officials did not discuss oil prices or production levels with their Saudi counterparts, Mr. Wright said.
President Trump has said that he wants energy to be cheaper and that he would "ask Saudi Arabia and OPEC to bring down the cost of oil." Oil prices have fallen by around $10 a barrel since he imposed tariffs, and then reduced many of them, on U.S. trading partners around the world.
But the kingdom needs higher prices to finance Prince Mohammed's spending plans, including a pledged $600 billion increase in trade and investments in the United States - an amount equivalent to two-thirds of the entire Saudi sovereign wealth fund.
Mr. Wright, who was a fracking executive before his appointment as energy secretary, played down any divergence in oil policy between the two countries.
"I'm seeing great agreement here in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia that the way to make the world a better place is to produce more energy, not less," he said.

The leaders of the United States and Britain could not be further apart on their climate and energy policies, the pomp of President Trump's state visit notwithstanding.
President Trump has announced the withdrawal of the United States from the Paris agreement.
Prime Minister Keir Starmer of Britain has announced the most ambitious climate target of any industrial economy, committing to reduce his country's climate pollution by 81 percent by 2035, compared with 1990 levels.
President Trump has called for the revival of coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel, including by ordering some old coal-burning power plants to stay open.
Britain closed its last coal plant last year, a move all the more symbolic for the birthplace of the industrial revolution over 150 years ago. Some old coal plant sites are being turned into battery farms to store energy drawn from solar and wind.
Their postures on renewable energy, which is broadly popular in both countries, are in sharp contrast.
President Trump has knee-capped government support for clean energy projects at home and earlier this year urged Britain to "get rid of the windmills and bring back the oil."
Mr. Starmer has said he wants to accelerate the transition away from fossil fuels and produce the country's electricity mainly from renewable energy sources by 2030. In 2024, Britain for the first time generated just over half (50.8 percent) of its energy from renewable sources, most of that from wind power.

The two leaders seem to agree on one thing: nuclear energy.

Mr. Starmer and Mr. Trump have struck a deal to build more nuclear plants in Britain. Nuclear energy produces no greenhouse gas emissions, though it comes with concerns about safety and waste disposal, and so it helps Britain advance its climate goals.

Mr. Starmer's administration has promised to fast-track reviews of proposed new plants, while Mr. Trump has issued executive orders to speed up the approvals of nuclear reactors in the United States. Mr. Starmer seems to have borrowed from the Trump playbook, announcing the deal as ushering in a "golden age" of nuclear. The Trump administration has championed what it calls a "nuclear renaissance."

At a newly built dock along Germany's Elbe River, tankers from the United States unload liquefied natural gas to fuel factories and homes. In central Spain, a forest of wind turbines planted atop mountains helps power the energy grid. In French government buildings, thermostats have been lowered in winter to save electricity.
In the three years since Russia's invasion of Ukraine ignited an energy crisis across Europe, the continent has transformed how it generates and stores power. Russian natural gas, long Europe's energy lifeline, has been replaced with other sources, notably liquefied natural gas from the United States. Wind and solar power generation has leaped around 50 percent since 2021. New nuclear power plants are being planned across the continent.
But Europe's energy security remains fragile. The region produces far less natural gas than it consumes and is still largely dependent on other countries, especially the United States, to help keep the lights on. Natural gas, which drives the price of electricity, is roughly four times as expensive as in the United States. High energy costs have strained households and forced factories to close, weakening Europe's economy.
A dependence on Russia
The 2022 invasion of Ukraine revealed Europe's dependence on energy from Russia, especially natural gas, which accounts for around 20 percent of Europe's energy consumption.
"The energy appeared cheap, but it exposed us to blackmail," Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, the European Union's executive arm, told the World Economic Forum last month.
Prices soared in 2022 on worries that Russia would completely cut off gas flows into Europe as well as other factors. Countries banded together to share fuel and other energy sources, and build or modify infrastructure to transport it. These efforts are forecast to have reduced Europe's reliance on Russian gas to 8 percent of supplies in 2025, from 35 percent in 2021, according to Anna Galtsova, an analyst at S&P Global Commodity Insights, a research firm.
Norway is now the largest supplier of gas, mainly through a web of pipelines. But Russia has become a large supplier of liquefied natural gas, second only to the United States in 2024.
And Europe has become better at directing the energy to where it is needed, creating "a tremendous amount of flexibility that Europe didn't have on the eve of the war," said Anatol Feygin, chief commercial officer at Cheniere Energy, a large American L.N.G. exporter.
Helping that pivot were programs that encouraged households and government buildings to lower thermostats to 19 degrees Celsius (66 degrees Fahrenheit). Factories across Europe also curbed production to avoid blistering energy bills. Other initiatives, like having stores shut off lights early in the evening, have been rolled out.
Europe built more renewable energy projects to help bridge the gap. Before Russia's invasion, around a third of Europe's power generation came from renewable energy, propelled by a buildup of wind and solar power. In 2024, wind and solar farms generated more electrical power than fossil fuels for the first time, according to S&P Global Commodity Insights.
"That is a big change, and that speaks to the additional policy push to get alternative sources of energy into the system," said Tim Gould, chief energy economist at the International Energy Agency in Paris.
But shifting to renewable energy is costly. Although overall energy prices have declined from their 2022 peaks, both gas and electricity tariffs remain elevated. Renewable sources like wind and solar have made great progress, but much investment is still needed to fill in the gaps in periods of low wind and sun.
Large polluters like steel makers have said Europe is not doing enough to foster a shift to greener operations. "European policy, energy and market environments have not moved in a favorable direction," ArcelorMittal, Europe's largest steel company, said in November.
The largest alternative to gas piped in from Russia by far has been liquefied natural gas, but it is a relatively expensive option. With gas vital for industry, heating and power generation, the shift away from Russian supplies has been difficult.
Europe is at the mercy of global markets, bidding against the likes of China and South Korea for liquefied natural gas. Prices have recently soared to the highest level in a year, hurting businesses and adding to a cost-of-living crisis in Europe.
The largest source of liquefied natural gas has been the United States, mostly terminals from the Gulf Coast, which provide nearly half of Europe's supply. Europe has seen a boom in setting up terminals to receive L.N.G., especially in Germany, which had none before the energy crisis.
During a cold snap in January, several American tankers carrying liquefied natural gas to Asia changed course for Europe, where they could make a bigger profit, said Natasha Fielding, head of European gas pricing at Argus Media, a London research firm.
"Europe has made really remarkable strides," said David L. Goldwyn, who was a State Department energy envoy during the Clinton and Obama administrations. "But when the weather turns cold and competition from Asia for L.N.G. increases, the situation looks more challenging."
Natural gas prices in Europe have fallen from the punishing highs of 2022, but in 2024, they were still double their five-year average before the war, according to the International Energy Agency.
Although imports of Russian gas through Europe's pipelines have plummeted, Europe has expanded its purchases of liquefied natural gas from Russia, which arrives via port. There has not been enough time to develop new resources like L.N.G. to compensate for the loss of Russian gas.
The ebbs and flows of L.N.G. are largely determined by market forces. President Trump has pushed Europe to import more fuel from the United States, and Ms. von der Leyen has suggested that L.N.G. from the United States could replace Russian fuel.
Some level of additional gas exports to Europe from Russia could be included as a sweetener for President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to agree to a settlement in Ukraine, analysts say. "That would be a serious negative for U.S. energy exporters," Mr. Goldwyn said.
The cost of the energy crisis
Exorbitant gas costs contributed to soaring inflation and led factories that employed thousands in Europe to close or relocate to countries with cheaper energy.
Some of the biggest European names are trimming their operations. The German chemical giant BASF said it would close some production at its site in Ludwigshafen near the border with France, while making the largest foreign investment in its history in China, where energy is up to two-thirds cheaper than in Europe.
High natural gas prices have translated into higher costs for making ammonia, a crucial component in fertilizers. Yara International, a fertilizer giant based in Norway, is stopping ammonia production at its plant in Tertre, Belgium, potentially leading to more than 100 job losses. "High energy prices are a huge challenge for European competitiveness," a spokeswoman said.
The energy crisis has also led to a painful cost-of-living crisis for families across Europe. Energy poverty has jumped in Europe, with nearly 10 percent of the population reporting that it is unable to keep its homes warm, and larger numbers of households falling behind on paying their energy bills.
"We've created a state of energy precariousness," said Niki Vouzas, spokeswoman for the National Federation of Rural Families in France. "People are heating their house less, and filling up the gas tank less."
Recent months have brought renewed signs of market unease. The colder weather has caused Europe to draw down the levels of storage it builds up for the winter at a faster rate than the previous year, leading to worries that rebuilding these stocks over the summer may be expensive.
"The challenge will be this summer to replenish the reserves ahead of the following winter," Ms. Fielding of Argus said.
Despite the premium prices of recent years, Europe's overall gas production has declined. Higher taxes have deterred investment in the British North Sea while the Netherlands is shutting the once prolific Groningen field after production triggered earthquakes. Domestic output in the European Union and Britain amounted to less than 20 percent of consumption in 2024, S&P Global Commodity Insights estimates.
Austria's OMV is one of the rare companies aiming to increase gas production in Europe. The only way to make Europe's energy costs competitive with other regions like the United States "is to increase supplies of gas" said Alfred Stern, OMV's chief executive.
"We are past peak crisis," said Michael Stoppard, global gas strategy lead at S&P Global Commodity Insights. "But we are not out of the woods."

South Korea, a global industrial powerhouse, made a bold bet on the United States a few years ago. It resolved to help Americans compete in the energy technologies of the future and, in so doing, reduce the United States' dependence on its chief rival on the world stage, China.
Now, South Korea is reeling from uncertainty.
U.S. energy priorities have done an about-face. Korean exports to the United States have been hit with Trump tariffs, which will now stand at 15 percent as part of a new trade deal. Korean workers have been deported from a $5.5 billion Korean auto factory in Georgia. To assuage the White House, Korea's president has promised to buy more American natural gas than his country may be able to use. A Korean shipbuilder has promised to build a U.S.-flagged ship to ferry gas across the seas.
None of that may be enough.
Korean officials are watching carefully what happens at a summit meeting their country is hosting this week, where President Trump plans to meet with his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping. If the United States and China strike a trade deal, as officials from Washington and Beijing have indicated, Korea stands to lose its edge as an alternative to China.
"They went all in," Henry Haggard, a former U.S. diplomat in Seoul, said, referring to the Koreans' strategy to invest heavily in the U.S. market. "The biggest concern is if the U.S. and China make a deal that disadvantages Korea."
All of this reflects the dilemmas confronting many countries amid an epic competition between the world's two superpowers on energy and trade. The United States is bent on a future of burning more fossil fuels. China is promoting the renewable energy technologies it controls.
South Korea, like many countries around the world, wants both.
The United States and China are its two big trading partners. Korea needs a range of raw materials from China, whether graphite for battery anodes or photovoltaic cells to make solar panels. And it needs 
But Korea also needs the United States' military protection in the face of nuclear shenanigans by its adversary to the north, Kim Jong-un. And it desperately needs the American market. Korea has cast itself as a reliable alternative supplier of clean energy technologies to buyers that might be wary of relying on China. Its key advantage, in other words, is that it's not China.
The rise of gas in Korea
Incheon, on Korea's northwestern coast, is where General Douglas MacArthur in 1950 led a legendary assault that turned the Korean War to the South's favor.
Today, Incheon is home to the world's largest terminal to import L.N.G., or liquefied natural gas. As such, it is a linchpin of the Trump administration's relationship with Seoul.
South Korea began importing American L.N.G. during Mr. Trump's first term, in 2017. The U.S. fracking boom was just starting and South Korea was trying reduce its dependence on nuclear power. Gas imports grew, but have since flattened for a variety of reasons, and they are projected to decline in the coming decade as Korea pivots toward cleaner energy like wind power.
Today, around a tenth of South Korea's L.N.G. supply comes from the United States, ferried by tankers from export terminals that Korean banks helped finance on the Gulf Coast of Texas and Louisiana. The rest comes from gas suppliers in the Middle East and elsewhere.
In July, under pressure from President Trump, South Korean president, Lee Jae Myung, agreed to buy $100 billion in American L.N.G. over an unspecified number of years.
Whether that's good for his country, or even realistic, is unclear. Not only is gas demand projected to decline as South Korea ramps up renewables, but getting locked into multiyear deals with U.S. exporters now, when gas prices are relatively high, could prove to be costly.
Not to mention, being overly reliant on one supplier can be hazardous. "Diversifying supply sources is important," said Taesik Kim, a research fellow at the Korea Energy Economics Institute in Ulsan. After all, relations between nations can change over time, sometimes drastically, as recent events have shown.
Gas makes up a fifth of South Korea's energy mix. The South Korean government, though, is reducing its use of fossil fuels and stepping up renewables in order to cut its greenhouse gas emissions. The Trump administration's pressure to buy more gas undermines that goal.

For the time being, though, South Korea, like many countries around the world, is trying to mollify a mercurial Trump administration.
Korean companies need Americans to buy what they make. Their own market is far too small. "It's about seeing the American market and the American continent as the place for future business," said Mr. Haggard, the former U.S. diplomat.
Not that Korea could compete with China, which outcompetes everyone on renewable energy technology. China produces the most affordable electric cars in the world and the least-costly solar panels. It dominates the processing of the minerals for batteries
But Korea's idea was that it would help the United States make some headway in clean energy. Korean companies knew how to make electric cars, the batteries that go into electric cars and the charging stations to power those electric cars. And by investing in factories in the United States, Korean companies could train and employ millions of American workers.
Billions of dollars poured in from Seoul.
Hyundai built a $5.5 billion electric vehicle plant outside Savannah, Ga., part of a $26 billion investment plan for the United States. Another Korean company, CS Wind, bought a factory in Colorado to make wind towers.
LG Energy Solutions opened seven battery factories across the United States. A rival battery maker, SK On, partnered with Ford to supply its nascent line of electric vehicles. One of its subsidiaries set up a factory in Plano, Texas, to make charging stations. Samsung said it planned to invest $55 billion to make batteries and semiconductor chips in America.
The Biden administration's policies accelerated these investments. The Inflation Reduction Act offered incentives to set up clean energy manufacturing plants.
Then came the election of Mr. Trump. He shredded Biden-era renewable energy incentives. The American auto industry more or less put the brakes on their plans for electric vehicles, jolting Korean companies that had banked on a transition in the United States away from gasoline-burning vehicles.
There was one upside for Korea, however. The Trump administration raised tariffs on Chinese goods.
For Korean companies, particularly the largest ones, that meant all was not lost. The higher the tariffs on Chinese batteries, the better it was for Korean battery makers and, particularly, Korean battery makers in the United States. And even if electric vehicles were slipping in the United States, Korean battery makers could pivot to making batteries for energy storage. Data centers certainly needed them.
Enter now new uncertainty in the form of a potential U.S.-China trade deal that could be announced this week at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit.
Will the new deal make it easier on Korean battery makers that still rely on China for battery materials, like graphite? That would be a relief. Will that allow Chinese companies to export to the United States batteries they make elsewhere, or even set up plants in the United States? That would be bad for Korea. Andrew Yeo, a Korea specialist at the Brookings Institution, called a U.S.-China deal "a double-edged sword."

The details are not yet known, only that the United States may pause some tariffs on Chinese goods, and that China may pause proposed restrictions on rare earth minerals. For now, there's no telling what kind of deal Trump and Xi will strike, nor how stable that will be.
"They want to know: What are the new rules of the road?" said Tim Bush, a battery industry analyst at UBS Securities.

In 2020, the Emirates became the first Arab country to open a nuclear power plant, saying it needed nuclear energy to reduce its reliance on oil, but its agreement with the United States forbids it from enriching uranium. That raised concerns that it could set off a race among Arab nations for nuclear programs.
Seyed Hossein Mousavian, a former Iranian diplomat and member of its nuclear negotiating team in 2015, originally wrote about the idea of a regional nuclear consortium in 2023 in an article in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Mr. Mousavian, now a scholar at Princeton, wrote it with physicist at that university, Frank von Hippel.
In an interview, Mr. Mousavian said that if the proposal moves forward, it would address several of America's concerns. It would remove the immediate threat of Iran's nuclear program by reducing its enrichment capacity and stockpile. He said it would also address longer-term concerns about Iran reversing course, as it did a year after Mr. Trump exited the nuclear deal in 2018.
"If Trump announces a regional nuclear deal, it will be big victory," Mr. Mousavian said. "It removes the immediate and future threat from Iran and contains enrichment ambitions in the region and brings new deals for Americans."


